V1.12

Ulster University
Admissions Policy

Delivering a University that is innovative and sustainable with a strong
academic and international reputation.

1

V1.12

ULSTER UNIVERSITY
ADMISSIONS POLICY
CONTENTS

Page

1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Scope
1.2 Institutional Context
1.3 Overall Aims of the Policy
1.4 University Regulations
1.5 Student Charter

4
4
5
5
5

2. PRINCIPLES OF SELECTION
2.1 Aims of Selection
2.2 Selection Criteria

6
6

3. ENTRANCE REQUIREMENTS / ACCEPTABILITY OF QUALIFICATIONS
3.1 Full-Time Undergraduate Programmes
8
3.2 Full-Time Postgraduate Programmes
8
3.3 Research Degree Programmes
8
3.4 International Qualifications
9
3.5 Accreditation of Prior Learning (APL)
9
3.6 Part-Time Study
9
3.7 Requests to Transfer between Modes of Study
10
3.8 Applicants Returning to Undergraduate Study
10
4. DISABLED APPLICANTS
4.1 Selection and Entry Criteria
4.2 Professional Bodies and Health and Safety Issues
4.3 Communication during the Application Process
4.4 Administration of the Admissions Process

11
11
11
12

5. ADMISSIONS PROCEDURES
5.1 Applications Made via UCAS
5.2 Applications made directly to the University
5.3 Acknowledgement of receipt of Application
5.4 Assessment of Tuition Fees
5.5 Fraudulent Statements/Omissions
5.6 Plagiarism
5.7 Applicants seeking Deferred Entry
5.8 Readmission to the University
5.9 International Applications – Immigration Requirements
5.10 Procedures for Making Offers
5.11 Feedback to Unsuccessful Applicants
5.12 Use of Applicant Data
5.13 Support and Training for Admissions Staff

13
13
13
13
13
13
14
14
14
14
15
15
17

6. TUITION FEES AND FINANCIAL SUPPORT

18

2

V1.12
Page

CONTENTS
7. ADMISSIONS COMPLAINTS PROCEDURES

19

APPENDICES
Appendix 1 - Regulatory Framework of Policy

20

3

V1.12

1.

INTRODUCTION

1. 1 Scope

This policy applies to all admissions to Ulster University and is reviewed annually.
1.2 Institutional Context
Our Vision and Mission : As Northern Ireland’s civic university, Ulster University will deliver
outstanding research and teaching that encourages the innovation, leadership and vision
needed to help our community thrive.
Grounded in the heart of the community Ulster University will;
• Transform lives, stretch minds, develop skills and raise ambitions
• Deliver globally significant research with local relevance
• Encourage a diverse university community
• Make a lasting contribution to society as a whole
Priority 1:

Civic Contribution

We will be an international exemplar of the role of a university building civic society.
Priority 2 :

Academic Excellence

Research – Our research activities and outcomes will continue to have global significance and
meaningful impact.
Teaching – Our educational experience will transform lives, develop skills, raise ambitions
and prepare future leaders.
Priority 3 :

Global Vision

Our global vision is premised on building a globally engaged and globally relevant university.
Priority 4 :

Operational Excellence

Our strong developmental framework will build capacity and capability to ensure we achieve
our ambitions
Ulster University is strongly committed to the inclusive economic, social and cultural
transformation and global advancement of Northern Ireland. The strength, quality and success
of our teaching provision, our graduates, our research and innovation, and the commitment of
our staff are widely acknowledged. In particular, we value our ability to combine the shaping and
delivery of our core academic provision by building close and productive links across the
economy and society both locally and internationally.
The University is proud to rank in the top 10 of UK universities for its commitment to widening
access and widening participation. We aim to attract the most suited students and encourage
applications from groups of people who are known to be disadvantaged by traditional selection
mechanisms. We are proactive in engaging with education providers and community groups in
order to raise aspirations for and encourage participation in Higher Education; and are receptive
to identifying alternative methods for demonstrating an ability to meet selection criteria.
4

V1.12

The University operates in clearly defined market segments and applies its selection criteria
fairly and consistently for all applicants.
Further information on the University’s Five Year Strategic Plan and Fiftieth Year Strategic Vision
2016 – 2034 can be viewed at:
www.ulster.ac.uk/fiveandfifty/strategicplan.pdf

1.3 Overall Aims of the Admissions Policy
The aims of the Admissions Policy are to ensure that:
1.

a wide range of flexible educational and training opportunities are available, designed to
meet the needs of the community in Northern Ireland and elsewhere;

2.

opportunities to access and progress to higher-level study are developed in line with
market demand and higher education guidelines and equality legislation;

3.

selection is based primarily on academic criteria and/or other competencies as
appropriate. No candidate should be excluded from entry to a programme specifically by
reason of religious belief, political opinion, racial group, gender, age, marital status,
sexual orientation, disability or responsibility for dependants; and

4.

all applicants have equitable and fair access to higher education.

The University Admissions Service, will ensure that this Policy and the appropriate procedures
are implemented and disseminated and are kept under regular evaluation and review.
1.4 University Regulations
The University’s Admissions Policy is compliant with all appropriate national legislation and
University Regulations. It also takes account of national guidelines governing the recruitment
and admission of students, for example, the UK Quality Code for Higher Education. Further
details may be found in Appendix 1.
1.5 Student Charter
The University is committed to continually improving the quality of its services and the Student
Charter (www.ulster.ac.uk/studentcharter/) is one way of outlining that commitment. The Charter
also explains what the University expects of its students. The quality of the services that the
University believes students are entitled to is balanced with responsibilities placed on its students.

2.

PRINCIPLES OF SELECTION

2. 1

Aims of Selection

2.1.1 To attract and retain students, from a wide and diverse community, who have the potential
to complete their programme of study successfully and benefit from the experience. In
5

V1.12
certain instances and subjects where places are limited, the University may be required
to adopt additional selection criteria which aim to assess applicants’ abilities and
aptitudes in as fair and equitable a manner as possible.
2.1.2 The University aims to provide comprehensive, accurate, user-friendly and accessible
information and advice to applicants and other stakeholders in the admissions process.
This is to enable an informed choice of programme(s) to be made appropriate to their
needs, interests, academic qualifications and potential.
Detailed information on entrance qualifications is provided as follows:
•
•
•

Printed and online prospectuses
School brochures and leaflets
University and
departmental websites

Details on Ulster’s entrance requirements and equivalences of qualifications are provided
at:
http://www.ulster.ac.uk/apply/entrance-requirements/equivalence
2.1.3 Selection is primarily based on academic criteria, including the General Entrance
Requirements; and therefore no candidate should be excluded from entry to a
programme specifically by reason of religious belief, political opinion, racial group,
gender, age, marital status, sexual orientation, disability or responsibility for dependants.
2.1.4 Ulster University has a reputation for being welcoming and inclusive. As a civic university
we are committed to widening access to higher education and to enhancing social
mobility by providing learning opportunities for everyone with the ability to benefit from
them - particularly those in society who are under -represented in our universities. We
accept a wide range of entry qualifications and apply our selection criteria fairly and
consistently for all applicants.
2.2

Selection Criteria

2.2.1 All applications are considered individually on their merits. The full information contained
within the application, including the personal statement and reference, where
appropriate, is considered. The admissions criteria will take into account institutional
policy, national guidelines, and relevant legislation.
2.2.2 Selection criteria are evaluated using appropriate and effective methods. Criteria are only
used where appropriate evaluation methods are available. Criteria are considered
carefully in order to ensure that the assessment of applicants is fair and transparent.
2.2.3 Selection criteria are reviewed regularly in order to ensure their on-going relevance to
developing curricula and teaching and learning practice, and in the light of changes in the
applicant pool.
2.2.4 Experience, motivation and commitment to the chosen programme may be considered.
2.2.5 Equivalent criteria shall be considered for all applicants where necessary. For applicants
who do not produce equivalent evidence, the University may seek and take into account
6

V1.12
additional information. Such additional information can include alternative evidence of an
ability to meet the selection criteria and evidence regarding the reasons why it was not
possible to demonstrate meeting the criteria in the normal way.
2.2.6 Evidence may be gathered through a variety of means. The University endeavours to
ensure that any additional assessment methods used are reliable and valid and give an
accurate indication of potential to successfully complete the chosen programme of study.
Additional methods of selection are used for a number of degree programmes. These
may include one or more of : interviews; tests; references; assessment of previous
employment experience or academic work; auditions; portfolios; seminar contribution;
HPAT Ulster; Personal Statements; Accreditation of Prior Learning (APL); and
storytelling. This is not an exhaustive list and the University reserves the right to
introduce further supplementary selection techniques.
Any significant change, proposed by a School, to its methods of selection is referred to
the Deputy Vice Chancellor and Head of Admissions for consideration and approval, prior
to implementation.
For each admissions cycle, the methods of recording applicant performance against
selection criteria and the communication of results to applicants, where additional
methods of selection are applied, are held at Faculty level in line with the University’s
Records Retention and Disposal Schedule.
2.2.7 All applicants to programmes where their studies will involve interaction with vulnerable
groups will be required to give permission for an enhanced AccessNI (ANI) check (or suitable
alternative in the case of international students) to be carried out. Access NI is part of central
government and operates under the provisions of Part V of the Police Act 1997.

7

V1.12

3.

ENTRANCE REQUIREMENTS / ACCEPTABILITY OF QUALIFICATIONS
The University has general minimum entrance requirements for all its awards, which are
the general qualifications an applicant must have. Some courses may also require these
qualifications to have been completed in specific subjects. A specific standard of
achievement may be required.

3.1

Full-Time Undergraduate Programmes
The University applies General Entrance Requirements to all of its undergraduate
programmes (visit http://www.ulster.ac.uk/study/entrance-requirements). These represent
the minimum qualifications which applicants are normally expected to present for entry.
All programmes will specify additional entrance requirements and these appear against
individual course entries in the University’s on-line prospectus for taught programmes at:
http://www.ulster.ac.uk/study
The most commonly offered equivalency of qualifications found at:
http://www.ulster.ac.uk/study/entrance-requirements/equivalence

3.2

is

Full-Time Postgraduate Programmes

The University normally requires applicants to its taught postgraduate programmes to
possess a degree or equivalent qualification. General Entrance Requirements for taught
postgraduate programmes are shown at:
http://www.ulster.ac.uk/study/entrancerequirements
For admission to a Master’s degree, a minimum lower second standard is normally
required. In addition, other selection criteria may be used against the individual
programme and can be seen in the University’s online prospectus:
http://www.ulster.ac.uk/study
3.3

Research Degree Programmes

The minimum academic qualification required for admission to PhD, MPhil or MRes is an
upper second class Honours degree or Master’s degree or equivalent qualification in a
relevant subject of study or proven ability via APL (see Section 3.5). The minimum
requirements for these and all other research degrees are detailed within the programme
regulations and can be viewed at: http://www.ulster.ac.uk/doctoralcollege/postgraduateresearch/apply
Admission to a research programme is highly competitive and all applications shall be
considered against a common set of selection criteria to include:
• the applicant’s academic or equivalent qualifications;
• the research proposal and personal statement;
• the ability of the research area to provide suitable resources including supervision
for the project;
• the reports of the referees; and
• the applicant’s performance at interview.

8

V1.12

3.4

International Qualifications

The University accepts a broad range of international qualifications. These are assessed
individually in terms of their content and level, with reference, where appropriate, to
relevant guidelines, e.g. the British Council, the National Academic Recognition
Information Centre for the United Kingdom (NARIC UK). Further information can be found
in relation to international equivalences on the UK NARIC website http://naric.org.uk and
also on the Global Engagement website at https://www.ulster.ac.uk/global/apply/entryrequirements
The University also requires overseas applicants, for whom English is not their first language,
to satisfy the English Language entry requirements for admission and a number of
examinations are acceptable, e.g. IELTS. For specific advice on the acceptability and
equivalence of international English Language qualifications please visit the University's
Global Engagement website at: https://www.ulster.ac.uk/global/apply/entry-requirements

3.5

Accreditation of Prior Learning (APL)
The University recognises both certificated and experiential learning. Accordingly, the
University may accept alternative forms of learning, provided these can be authenticated by
the appropriate means for the subject area at the appropriate level. The Admissions Service
in conjunction with each Faculty has in place procedures to support the consideration of
claims for admission on the basis of prior learning. Guiding principles and
policy
for
the
accreditation
of
prior
learning
are
available
at
http://www.ulster.ac.uk/study/entrance-requirements
A
set
available

3.6

of
Guidelines for
staff and applicants
at http://www.ulster.ac.uk/academicoffice/policies.

are

also

Part-Time Study

As part of the University’s commitment to widening access and participation, we
particularly welcome applications for part-time study.
The restriction on full-time undergraduate places in Northern Ireland means that full-time
entry is determined on a competitive basis. However, with part- time courses there is
generally less restriction on numbers, and therefore not the same degree of competition
for places.
In practice, admissions staff deal with part-time applications on a case- by-case basis, to
determine each candidate’s suitability and capability of succeeding on the course.
Decisions are made taking into account a range of criteria including the applicant’s
previous qualifications, evidence of relevant experience/skills, and evidence of
commitment and determination to pursue the course in question. The applicant may be
interviewed, and/or asked to submit a portfolio of evidence.

9

V1.12
3.7 Requests to Transfer between Modes of Study
Students wishing to transfer from part-time to full-time study mode or vice-versa on the
same undergraduate programme will normally be considered provided they are in good
academic standing and have completed at least 120 credit points of study.

3.8

Applicants Returning to Undergraduate Study
The University welcomes applications from students who have interrupted their studies for
several years or did not have the opportunity to enter higher education immediately after
completion of full-time education. Applications are considered on an individual basis but
evidence of successful recent academic study at a suitably high level is normally required.
Many students undertake Access courses as an alternative route into higher education.
These are designed to address the needs of students who would like to undertake a degree
programme but who have been away from education for some time and do not have the
necessary qualifications for admission. Applications from students undertaking these
qualifications and who have had a break in study (normally a minimum of two years) are
welcomed. Where offers are made, these are based on completion of the full Access
qualification which is normally available on a one year full-time or two years part time basis.

10

V1.12

4.

DISABLED APPLICANTS
The University strives to be an inclusive learning environment and welcomes and
encourages applications from persons with a disability.

4.1

Selection and Entry Criteria

4.1.1 The University recognises that its selection measures and procedures may not
enable disabled applicants to demonstrate fully their competence for their chosen
programme and so will take into account alternative evidence, such as examples
of previous work, additional references or evidence gained during interview in
order to ensure equal opportunity.
4.1.2 Without compromising academic standards, the University will make appropriate
reasonable adjustments to the selection process, if required. However, in order for
this to happen, the University must first be made aware of the adjustments that are
required.
4.2

Professional, Statutory and Regulatory Bodies and Health and Safety Issues
4.2.1 The requirements of professional, statutory and regulatory bodies will be made
clear in programme publications.
4.2.2 Where an application is made to a programme which is subject to professional
standards of fitness, consideration of reasonable adjustments will be offered as
part of the process of Occupational Health screening procedures.
4.2.3 The University is committed to ensuring that an individual assessment is carried out
relating to genuine Health and Safety risks. In cases where it appears that a genuine
risk to the Health and Safety of students and staff cannot be managed adequately,
concerns will be discussed openly with the applicant in order that the decision making
process is fully transparent and all alternative solutions are fully explored.

4.3

Communication during the Application Process

4.3.1 All applicants are encouraged to inform the University about disabilities, long term
medical conditions or mental ill health at an early stage in order to discuss the
support and reasonable adjustments which may be required.
4.3.2 Applicants who disclose a disability are assured that the information provided will be
treated sensitively and in accordance with the University’s Data Protection policy.

4.3.3 AccessAbility Services will take the initiative in contacting all students who disclose
a disability or medical condition (including mental ill-health) during the application
process, so that the student is aware of the support available whilst studying at the
University and can make informed decisions during the application process.
4.3.4 Applicants are encouraged to contact AccessAbility Services at any time during the
application process to discuss matters related to the support the University may put

11

V1.12
in place for them and to discuss the process for accessing funding support through
the Education Authority or other appropriate funding body.
4.4

Administration of the Admissions Process

4.4.1 All University staff involved in the admissions process will be careful to note the
need to make reasonable adjustments to procedures for disabled applicants.
4.4.2 In order to facilitate applications, admissions staff may seek further information from
the candidate and/or colleagues as appropriate.
The University provides information specifically for disabled applicants. This is maintained
by
AccessAbility Services.
Further information
may be
accessed
at:
https://www.ulster.ac.uk/wellbeing/home

12

V1.12

5.
5.1

ADMISSIONS PROCESS
Applications made via UCAS

All applications for admission to full-time undergraduate degree programmes must
normally be made through UCAS (Universities and Colleges Admissions Service)
except for applicants who are already students at the University and are transferring to
a different programme. The University will observe the procedures and deadlines for
the handling of applications as set out by UCAS.
5.2

Applications made directly to the University

All other applications to undergraduate part-time, postgraduate, research, exchange
and study abroad programmes are made directly to the University. Deadlines by which
applications must be submitted will vary, and will be publicised by the University.
5.3

Acknowledgement of receipt of Application

UCAS full-time undergraduate applicants will receive an acknowledgement of their
application directly from UCAS. Acknowledgement for direct entry applications are
issued from the Admissions Service, the International Admissions Service or the
Doctoral College.
5.4

Assessment of Tuition Fees

Where the fees status of an applicant is unclear, applicants may be asked to provide
further information. This information will be used solely to determine home, Great
Britain or overseas status for the purpose of tuition fees.
5.5

Fraudulent Statements/Omissions
Admission to, and continued study at Ulster University is subject to applicants disclosing
all facts and information relevant to their application, including clarification of
qualifications. If, during the course of the consideration of an application, an applicant is
discovered to (or there are grounds for believing) have omitted any information
requested in the instructions or the application form, or has made any misrepresentation
therein or given false information, the University reserves the right to withdraw an offer
of a place and/or dismiss their application. For fraudulent issues discovered after
admissions, if it has been discovered that a student has omitted or misrepresented
information including that pertaining to qualifications, the University reserves the right to
terminate the student registration.

5.6

Plagiarism
In response to the increasing practice of downloading material from commercial and
other websites and copying from applications submitted in previous years, software has
been introduced to detect the use of plagiarism in personal statements.
In cases where plagiarism is detected in material submitted as part of a candidate’s
application (via UCAS or direct entry), it could significantly impair a candidate’s chance of
13

V1.12
being admitted to the University. The University reserves the right to withdraw an offer of
a place and/or dismiss the application. Further information on the University’s Plagiarism
Policy can be viewed at : https://www.ulster.ac.uk/academicoffice/policies

5.7

Applicants seeking Deferred Entry

The University will consider requests from UCAS applicants for deferred entry for a
maximum of one year. Applicants should be aware that deferred entry may not always be
granted. The decision whether or not to offer a place to applicants for deferred entry rests
with the selectors of the programme. There is no provision for deferred entry for research
programmes.
5.8

Readmission to the University

5.8.1 Examination Procedures
In instances where a student failed at the final attempt and was required to withdraw from
a programme of study, he/she would not be eligible to apply for readmission in the next
academic year, to the same or related programme, or to that programme offered in a
different mode (full- time to part-time and vice versa), or to register as an occasional
student to retake the failed module(s). Transfer on educational grounds to the
programme offered in different mode would also not be permitted. This policy also
applies where a student is exited with a lower award due to failure at the final attempt.
Further details are available at:
https://www.ulster.ac.uk/studentadministration/staff/examinations-office/policies-andprocedures
5.8.2 Disciplinary Matters
Applications for readmissions to the University from previous students of the University
will be given consideration based on the individual circumstances and merits of each
case.
Applicants must ensure that any student conduct matters and/or expulsions are fully
disclosed when applying. Failure to disclose may result in a withdrawal or amendment to
an offer as appropriate. Applicants should contact the University Admissions Services
Team to request further information or advice on this matter.
Please also refer to the Terms and Conditions available at Your rights, obligations and
complaints - Ulster University
5.9

International Applications – Immigration Requirements
From 1 April 2009 immigration rules for students entering from outside the UK changed.
Students wishing to come to the UK must satisfy criteria for studying in the UK. This is
required to complete their application for permission to enter the UK for study which must
be obtained from the British Consulate, High Commission or Visa Centre in their home
country. Further information on this, and other important procedures, may be obtained on
the following websites:
https://www.ulster.ac.uk/global/pre-arrival/visas-and-immigration

14

V1.12

5.10 Procedures for Making Offers
5.10.1 When making offers to full-time undergraduate programmes which are conditional upon
subsequent achievement in examination the University is informed by UCAS. However,
where appropriate the University may also specify specific subjects and grades or
alternative means of demonstrating competence.
5.10.2 Applicants to full-time undergraduate programmes should note that the formal
notification of decisions is conveyed through UCAS. This will include details of the
conditions which may be attached to an offer of a place. Applicants who are unclear
about the conditions of any offer are advised to contact the Faculty offering the
programme.
5.10.3 Applicants to undergraduate part-time, postgraduate and research programmes are
notified directly by the University of decisions on their applications.
5.10.4 For the majority of UCAS applicants, results are provided directly to the University.
Otherwise applicants will be required to produce original certificates or other original
documentary evidence of examination results or proof of Entry Requirement
qualifications provided by the student, School or College last attended, Awarding Body or
relevant Educational Authority prior to registration. Offers may be conditional upon
subsequent achievement in academic examination or other methods of assessment, as
specified during the application process.
5.10.5 The number of available places per course are managed to ensure the students on each
course receive the optimum student experience.
Available places are allocated based on achievement of the required entry requirements.
In the event that an applicant does not initially meet the entry requirements and accepts
a changed course offer, the applicant is not normally eligible for transfer or re-entry with
advanced standing (i.e. by accumulated credit or recognition of previous study). This
does not apply to higher linked courses e.g. Bachelors and Integrated Masters.
Once enrolled, students are subject to the existing Change or Transfer Process where
there may be funding implications associated with any requested change

5.10.6 Joining Instructions
It is the responsibility of the Admissions Service to communicate with applicants who
have been made an offer, via UCAS, to ensure that they have the key information for
registration and enrolment. All applicants whose offer of a place is confirmed will receive
detailed electronic joining instructions, including: Welcome to UU, induction
arrangements; information on fees, bursaries and scholarships which may be available;
and procedures for registration and enrolment.
5.10.7 Changes to any of the University’s programmes, involving significant restructuring
or discontinuation, will be communicated to applicants affected by such changes by
the Admissions Service. This will be done at the earliest possible opportunity within
the admissions cycle.

15

V1.12
5.11

Feedback to Unsuccessful Applicants

5.11.1 The University will provide feedback, on request, to unsuccessful applicants. This will
not constitute a reconsideration of an application.
5.11.2 Feedback given will be in reference to the selection criteria employed by the programme.
Staff may not engage in comparisons of the relative merits of individual applications.
5.11.3 The form and depth in which feedback is provided may vary between different
programmes. Admissions Service, International Admissions Service or the Doctoral
College determine the amount and extent of feedback which they are able to offer.
5.11.4 Feedback will only be provided to applicants themselves, and at the applicant’s own
request, when they have contacted the Admissions Service, International Admissions
Service or Doctoral College offering the programme for which they have applied.

5.12 Use of Applicant Data
5.12.1 University use of applicant data
A declaration of consent on the UCAS form and direct entry form/on-line application gives
permission to the University to process personal and sensitive data (ethnic origin,
disability, criminal conviction). This enables those involved with the selection and
admissions process to respond to identified additional needs, to follow University policy
relating to criminal convictions and enables the University to compile its internal student
records. This information will be managed in accordance with the University’s Data
Protection policy and in line with GDPR legislation.
5.12.2 Statistical monitoring
Anonymised and aggregated applicant data are analysed at institutional, admissions and
Faculty level for purposes including monitoring, market research, planning and teaching
and learning, and in order to ensure that the University’s processes are fair.
5.12.3 Procedure for applicants disclosing a criminal record
a The University acknowledges the role of the education in the rehabilitative process
and a criminal record will not preclude an applicant from being offered a place.
However, the University has a duty to ensure the safety of its student and staff
community. Where an applicant indicates a criminal record, the selector(s) should
firstly consider the application against the academic and other criteria specified for the
programme. If the application meets these criteria, the application will be assessed in
order to ensure that neither the applicant nor the University community will be put at
risk if the applicant becomes a member of the University. The applicant’s information
will only be shared with those who are involved in the consideration of the application
and the applicant will be kept informed throughout the process. Details of the
procedures for the disclosure of, and consideration of, criminal convictions are
provided at: https://www.ulster.ac.uk/academicoffice/policies

16

V1.12
b Entrants to a number of undergraduate and postgraduate programmes involving work
with children and vulnerable adults are required to undergo a police check prior to
being admitted. (A police check applies to all entrants to certain professional courses
such as Social Work, Allied Health or Education courses for example.)
5.12.4 Use of enquiry data
The University may use contact details acquired during enquiry or application to provide
enquirers or applicants with details of programmes it believes may be of interest,
particularly where an offer of a place on the chosen programme may not be possible.

5.12.5 Freedom of information requests
The University is aware of its responsibilities to respond to requests for aggregated data
under the Freedom of Information Act 2000. Staff receiving such requests will seek the
guidance of the Office of the University Secretary.
5.12.6 Data Protection – GDPR
All staff will ensure that data use, retention and storage comply fully with the Data Protection
Act 1998. The University’s Office of the University Secretary will make staff aware of their
responsibilities in relation to data protection regulations. The information will also be used to
make statutory returns to bodies such as the Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA).
The HESA Student Collection Notice provides information to students about what happens
to their data when it is sent to HESA. This information is available online at
https://www.hesa.ac.uk/fpn

5.13 Support and Training for Admissions Staff
The University is committed to the provision of an applicant focussed professional
admissions service and in order to maintain an efficient and effective system will
undertake to provide admissions systems and applicant centred training to new staff as
well as the provision of a continuous review and refresher training programme for current
admissions staff.

6.

TUITION FEES AND FINANCIAL SUPPORT

Information about fees, financial support and payment policy for all categories of programmes
offered by the University of Ulster may be accessed at the following websites:
https://www.ulster.ac.uk/finance/student
Students with disabilities who require additional support to study at Ulster may be entitled to
funded support through the Disabled Students’ Allowance (DSA). Information on how to apply
for the Disabled Students’ Allowance can be found at https://www.studentfinanceni.co.uk/

17

V1.12
7.

ADMISSIONS COMPLAINTS PROCEDURE
The University operates an Admissions Complaints Procedure which allows for an
informal stage, a formal appeal/complaint handled at Faculty level, and finally an appeal
to a Provost. It covers all applicants to University credit-bearing and non-credit-bearing
programmes. Full details of the Admissions Complaints Procedure are available at:
https://www.ulster.ac.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/83019/Admissions-ComplaintsProcedure-November-2018-V7.pdf
A separate appeals procedure exists for recruitment to research programmes and details
are available at: https://www.ulster.ac.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/152394/Appealsat-admission.pdf

18

V1.12

APPENDICES
APPENDIX 1 - REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF POLICY
1.

National Legislation

The University’s Admissions Policy operates within the context of the following legislation:
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
1.10
1.11
1.12
1.13
1.14

Sex Discrimination (Northern Ireland) Order 1976
Disability Discrimination Act 1995 (as amended)
Special Educational Needs and Disability Order (Northern Ireland) 2005 (SENDO) (as
amended)
Race Relations (Northern Ireland) Order 1997
Fair Employment and Treatment (Northern Ireland) Order 1998
Northern Ireland Act 1998
Employment Equality (Sexual Orientation) Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2003
Employment Equality (Age) Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2006
Disability Discrimination (Northern Ireland) Order 2006
Equality Act (Sexual Orientation) Regulations 2006
Human Rights Act 1998
Data Protection Act 2018
Freedom of Information Act 2000
GDPR 2019

2.

National Regulation

The University’s Admissions Policy takes account of the UK Quality Code for Higher Education
for the assurance of academic quality and standards in higher education, with particular
reference to: Chapter B2 - Recruitment, Selection and Admission to Higher Education; and
Chapter B11 - Research Degrees (October 2013).
The Policy is also informed by the findings of Professor Steven Schwarz’s Admissions to Higher
Education Review (2004) in the context of higher education in England. In addition, The Policy
was advised by various guidelines issued through the Supporting Professionalism in
Admissions (SPA) Programme - a national, joint UCAS/UUK initiative. While this group no
longer exists, its principles and guidance are at the core of this admissions policy.
With respect to the equivalence of entrance qualifications, the University is guided by UCAS and
makes reference to the Tariff Points Framework when necessary. Where a qualification is not
included in this Framework, the University makes detailed recommendations with regard to the
suitability of nationally-accredited qualifications on a course-by-course basis.
3.

University Regulations

The Policy also operates under the University’s Regulations for the Enrolment of Students
which states:
3.1

Subject to the Charter, Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations of the University, intending
students shall apply for initial enrolment at the commencement of their programmes of

19

V1.12

3.2

3.3

study or research. Thereafter students shall enrol annually as required, normally at the
commencement of the academic session.
Enrolment is effected by the completion and endorsement by the Dean of the appropriate
faculty or his or her nominee, acting on the authority of the Senate, of the appropriate
enrolment form.
The Senate shall prescribe the procedures to be followed at enrolment. Enrolment is
conditional upon the fulfilment by students of the following requirements:
(a)
the provision to the University of information required by the University that is
accurate, complete and up-to-date; and the granting of consent to the University to
process this information, for such purposes as are necessary for the University to
perform its objectives pursuant to its Charter and for the efficient and smooth
running of the University in accordance with legislation in force;
(b)
the payment of fees and debts as determined by the Council; and
(c)
the granting of consent to the submission of their work to any electronic system for
the detection of plagiarism as may be necessary.
3.4
At initial enrolment all students shall sign or give by electronic means an
undertaking to comply with the Charter, Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations
of the University as are from time to time in force.
3.5
Persons who are unable to satisfy the conditions for enrolment at the appropriate
time, being the time laid down by the Senate under section 3, may at the
discretion of the Senate be provisionally enrolled for such period not exceeding
three months as may be authorised by or on behalf of the Senate. Students who
are provisionally enrolled are subject to the Charter, Statutes, Ordinances and
Regulations of the University as are from time to time in force. The provisional
enrolment of a person shall become null and void if he or she has not fulfilled the
conditions for enrolment by the end of the period allowed for provisional
enrolment.
3.6
If a registered or occasional student fails to meet such requirements in relation to
enrolment as Council and Senate may prescribe (for example in relation to the
payment of tuition fee debts or the disclosure of criminal convictions), his or her
enrolment may be revoked at any time by the Vice-Chancellor or his or her
nominee acting under the authority of the Senate.
3.7
A registered or occasional student who has been granted an intermission in his or
her studies or leave of absence from his or her studies shall not be required to
enrol for the period of intermission or leave.
3.8
A registered student may be excused enrolment for part of his or her programme
of study or research following his or her election or appointment to office in any
representative student body approved for the purposes of this paragraph by the
Senate, and a student so excused shall remain a registered student for as long
as may be approved by the Senate.
Further information can be found in the Student Guide:
http://www.ulster.ac.uk/guide

20