Car Park Policy
Car Park Operational Policy

Introduction
All users of University Car Parks are deemed to have received and read the Terms and
Conditions. Access to car parks, irrespective of method of entry, is deemed to be acceptance
of these Conditions. Illegally parked vehicles may be clamped. Anyone found abusing the
system may have their means of access revoked and may be subject to legal and disciplinary
measures.
The car parking scheme has been operational since September 2004.
After 12 months of operation a Review Group chaired by the Acting Vice-Chancellor was
established, with representatives of all staff categories, including Trades Union
representatives, the Students' Union President and a lay member of the Council. This group
made recommendations which were approved by Planning Committee in April 2005 and
subsequently presented to and approved by Council in May 2005.

Operation Hours
All sites except Belfast operate the full scheme. Belfast offers parking for scheme members
and pre-booked visitors and there will be no pay on foot machines. All car parks will open 24
hours per day throughout the year, excluding 25th December.
Car Park charging will apply between the following times:
Monday to Thursday: 7.00am – 7.00pm
Friday: 7.00am – 5.00pm
All other periods will be free of charge. However, irrespective of time of entry or exit, where
a parking stay extends before or after the free period, charges will apply for the time before
and/or after the free of charge period. Barriers and CCTV will remain in operation 24 hours
per day to maintain security
All vehicles entering or exiting University sites will have to go through vehicle barriers.
Access through the barriers will be permitted by a variety of means; permits, top–up cards,
tickets or credit cards
The Belfast campus has only a limited number of spaces that are available exclusively for
blue badge holders and service vehicles.
The University reserves the right to close part or all of a car park without prior notice.

Charging
Last Reviewed October 2016

All staff/students and visitors must pay (within the times outlined above) to use the car parks
on all campuses. Access to the Belfast campus is restricted to scheme members and prebooked visitors.
Disabled staff and students will be eligible for a permit subject to presentation of a valid Blue
Badge and a nominal £1 annual fee. Disabled visitors may park in designated disabled spaces
and will have to pay the appropriate tariff. Vehicles parked in disabled spaces not displaying
a valid blue badge will be clamped and subject to a £50 release fee.
Public transport vehicles, mini-buses and private multi-purpose vehicles with a seating
capacity of 15 or more, branded light good vehicles, vans, lorries, contractors construction
plant, etc. will have free access. University owned/leased vehicles will also have free access.
Taxis will have 30 minutes to drop off and pick up passengers free of charge before having to
pay (during charging periods as outlined above).
Bicycles and motorcycles have free access provided they park in a designated
bicycle/motorcycle space. Bicycles and motorcycles parking in designated car parking spaces
will be clamped.
Staff and student owners of motorcycles must register their vehicle with the Car Park and
Traffic Management Office by completing the Motorcycle Registration Form .
All vehicles entering the campus (during charged periods) will have a period of up to 30
minutes, free of charge, to drop off/pick up passengers, make collections/deliveries and exit
the campus by presenting the ticket, taken on entry, at the exit barrier.
A variety of different methods of payment are available. These include: permits, daily tickets,
top-up cards or credit cards.
Annual permit costs are inclusive of all University holidays, with no refunds being available
for any holiday or University closure periods. The purchase of a permit, ticket or top-up card
only provides the right to hunt for a space on the University Campuses. It does not guarantee
a space.
Application for car parking permits should be made via the Online Store , and other forms
can be downloaded from the Car Park and Commuting Website or obtained from the Car
Park and Traffic Management Office located on each campus.

Current Tariffs and Methods of Payments
Staff Permits
A staff annual permit costs £75 per annum for those up to and including spinal point 23
(equivalent to a charge of less than £1.50 per week) and £150 for those on spinal point 24 and
above (equivalent to a charge of less than £3.00 per week). Staff are determined as an
individual who has an 'e' code, is employed by the university and paid through the university
salaries and wages scheme.

The cost of parking will be deducted directly from employee scheme members' salaries –
monthly or weekly depending on salary/wage payment frequency. The regular amount may
vary but will generally be 1/12 or 1/52 of the annual amount due. The University will assess
the amount paid at the end of the year and may take an additional payment to make up the
amount due. Staff permits will operate from the date the member of staff signs-up until they
serve notice in writing of their intention to leave the scheme in accordance with section 5 of
this Policy.
Staff wishing to avail of direct deductions should e-mail carparks@ulster.ac.uk . Those staff
wishing to buy their permit directly should complete their purchase via the Online Store .
The Staff ID card will be activated and used as a proximity card at the campus control
barriers to permit entry to and exit from the campus. The proximity card must be presented
each time a staff permit holder wishes to enter or exit the campus. Staff new to the car
parking scheme will be required to attend the Car Parking office to validate their staff card,
before it will permit access at the campus control barriers.
Staff may wish to avail of the car sharing scheme whereby they pay a proportion of the tariff
due depending on the number within the group - 50% of tariff for a group of two, 33% for a
group of three and 25% for a group of four or more. A Staff Car Sharing Supplementary
Form should be completed by each person in the group – up to 4 on a form - and handed in to
the Car Parking office after application has been made for a staff permit.
Disabled staff will be eligible for an annual permit at a cost of £1 per annum subject to the
presentation of a valid Blue Badge and completion of an application via the Online Store .

Student Permits
Students can purchase a 12 month permit for £75, a 9 month permit for £60 or a 6 month
permit for £40 (equivalent to a charge of approximately £1.50 per week). The duration of the
chosen permit will run from the date of purchase.
Applications should be made via the Online Store .
The duration of the chosen permit will run from the date indicated by the purchaser, on the
application.
Permits can be activated within 48 hours of payment providing students have been a member
of the car parking scheme in the previous 12 months, and they have not changed their student
ID card.
For students new to the car parking scheme, they will be required to attend the car parking
office to validate their student card, before it will permit access at the campus control
barriers.
New (first year) students not in possession of their Student ID card, should attend the car
parking office to enable the activation of their card.
Where students are car sharing one student should complete the On-line Application with the
Group jointly completing the Students Car Sharing Supplementary Form . The charge for a

single or shared application is £75 for a 12-month permit, £60 for a 9 month permit or £40 for
a 6-month permit. Each student must present their student ID card to be programmed for car
sharing.
Disabled students will be eligible for an annual permit at a cost of £1 per annum subject to
the presentation of a valid Blue Badge and completion of an application via the Online Store
.

Commercial Tenants/Non-University Employees Tariffs
Commercial tenants will be eligible to purchase a limited number of annual permits at £150
each. The number of such permits will be linked to the space leased by that particular tenant.
Applications should be made via the Online Store .
Regular car park users who work on campus but are not University staff can purchase an
annual Other Users permit at the cost of £150. Alternatively, all non-UU employees and
students can opt for hourly/daily tickets or a top-up card. Other User is determined as an
individual who is not directly employed by the university i.e. is not a member of staff with an
'e' code or not an enrolled student with a 'B' code; but who requires regular access to the
university to undertake work which is in support of and for the benefit of the university.

Disabled Visitors
Disabled Visitors may park in designated areas providing they display a valid blue badge and
will have to pay the appropriate tariff.
Vehicles parked in disabled spaces not displaying a valid blue badge will be clamped and
subject to a £50 release fee.

Hourly or Daily Ticket Tariffs
Infrequent users/Visitors can purchase hourly or daily tickets at the following prices:
Time
Cost
TimeFirst 30 mins CostFREE
TimeUp to 2hrs Cost£0.80
TimeUp to 3hrs Cost£1.20
TimeUp to 4hrs Cost£1.50
TimeUp to 5hrs Cost£1.80
TimeUp to 6hrs Cost£2.00
TimeUp to 9hrs Cost£2.50
TimeUp to 24hrs Cost£3.00
Drivers using this method of payment press a button and take a paper ticket at the barrier on
entry to the campus. Prior to returning to their car drivers must present their ticket at the Payon-Foot station, (if over 30 minutes), pay the appropriate tariff, take their validated ticket,

return to their vehicle and present their ticket at the exit barrier. Drivers have 30 minutes
grace from paying at the Pay-on-Foot station to exiting the campus.
Pay-on-Foot stations are located near the main entrances to/exits from main buildings. The
positions of Pay-on-Foot stations are shown on campus car parking maps.
Pay-on-Foot stations will take notes, coins, credit cards, issue change and provide receipts.
Pay-on-Foot stations also accept Euro notes. Change is given in sterling regardless of
tendered currency.
Alternatively, drivers can present their credit card both at the entrance and exit barriers. There
is no need to go to a Pay-on-Foot station. The system will calculate the tariff due and deduct
this amount from the credit card account.

Top up cards
This facility provides occasional users of the car parks i.e. infrequent but repeat visitors, parttime students, etc., an option not to have to go to pay stations. Top up cards work on a similar
basis to those for 'Pay as You Talk' mobile phones.
Top up cards are purchased from the Online Store with an initial credit value of £10, £30 or
£50. The initial card purchase will cost an additional £1. Cards can be collected 48 hours after
purchase from the Car Parking Office on campus.
Cards can be topped up to any value (up to their original value) in increments of £0.10 at
Pay-on-Foot stations using cash or credit cards. The original top up value can only be
increased by visiting the Car Park and Traffic Management Office. Credit cards will only top
up to the full value of the card and will not top up in increments. Refunds are not available
for top up card purchases.
Top-Up Tariffs are as hourly/daily rates less 5% i.e.
Time
Cost
TimeFirst 30 mins CostFREE
TimeUp to 2hrs Cost£0.76
TimeUp to 3hrs Cost£1.14
TimeUp to 4hrs Cost£1.43
TimeUp to 5hrs Cost£1.71
TimeUp to 6hrs Cost£1.90
TimeUp to 9hrs Cost£2.38
TimeUp to 24hrs Cost£2.85
Top up cards are like cash and should be treated that way. As no details/record of users are
maintained, refunds for will not be possible.
Top up cards cannot be purchased and funded by a University cost centre.

The charges for daily/hourly tickets and top up cards will apply within the timeframes as
shown at No. 2. The system will calculate how much of your time in the car park is
chargeable and how much is free.

NOTE
If you forget your proximity card, there is no alternative other than to take an hourly/daily
ticket and pay the calculated tariff for that visit/day. There is no way to obtain entry/exit other
than using a permit/proximity card or hourly/daily tickets and credit cards.
All drivers must be in possession of a relevant, valid driving licence for the vehicle they are
driving.
All vehicles and drivers must be covered by relevant and adequate insurance cover at all
times.
The system incorporates anti-abuse measures which prevent cards being used more than once
in any direction without having been used in the opposite direction in between i.e. your card
cannot be used for entry unless it has been used to exit beforehand. Also cards will only
operate when a car is present at the barrier.
All car park users are expected to fully co-operate with the Car Park and Traffic Management
Office /University Security Staff to achieve the aims and objectives of this car parking policy.
Failure to comply with the agreed car parking arrangements, and where there are no
mitigating circumstances, will be treated as a misconduct issue and the appropriate action
taken by informing the relevant Provost/Faculty Dean/Department Director.

Cancellations
When you no longer require a space at the University you must notify the Car Park and
Traffic Management Office who will deactivate your card.
Staff must complete and submit a Staff Permit Cancellation Form one full month before they
wish to leave the scheme. After leaving the scheme staff are not permitted to rejoin for a
further 3 months.
Students who have purchased a permit can only claim refunds for a full six-month period.
The cancellation will be effective one month from the date of receipt of the cancellation form.
The cancellation form will therefore need to be received before the beginning of the 5th
month for a 12 month permit and before the beginning of the 3rd month for a 9 month permit.
A completed Student Permit Cancellation Form should be submitted and the cancellation will
take effect one month from the date of receipt of the cancellation form. No refunds will be
given on 6 month permits.
Other users who have purchased a permit can only claim refunds for a period of six-months
or longer. The cancellation will be effective one month from the date of receipt of the
cancellation form. The cancellation form will therefore need to be received before the
beginning of the 5th month. No refunds will be given for periods of less than 6 month

duration. A completed Other Users Cancellation Form should be submitted and the
cancellation will take effect one month from the date of receipt of this form. No refunds will
be given on 6 month permits.
Groups using the car sharing scheme who wish to cancel their membership or remove one of
the members from the scheme must present all student/staff ID cards which were originally
activated to the Car Park and Traffic Management Office and complete the relevant
student/staff cancellation form. A refund will only be granted if all members of the car
sharing group wish to cancel. A student car sharing group who had purchased a 12 month or
9 month permit can only claim refunds for a full six-month period. Therefore they should,
before the end of the 5th month for a 12 month permit or the 3rd month for a 9 month permit,
complete and submit a Student Permit Cancellation Form . The cancellation will take effect
one month from the date of receipt of the cancellation form.

Short Term and Long Term Sickness
Generally no refunds are given for short-term sickness less than 1 month in duration.
Staff who expect to be absent for periods in excess of 1 month, due to illness, must terminate
their participation in the scheme and re-apply on their return. In exceptional circumstances
refunds may be given retrospectively to staff absent for more than 3 months who have not
terminated their participation in the scheme.

Tariff Increases
Tariff increases are governed by the Ulster University, who reserve the right to vary tariffs
giving 3 months’ notice. Any changes will be publicised before coming into effect.

Reserved Car Parks
A small number of reserved car parking spaces are available primarily for guests/visitors at
each campus. These spaces are available on a first come first served basis. Users of these
reserved car parks will still have to take a ticket at campus entrances and either pay the tariff
at the Pay-on-Foot station or have their ticket validated by their host.
Reserved spaces for visitors or staff can only be booked using Car Park Reservations . Spaces
for visitors should ideally be booked at least 72 hours in advance of when they are required
and NO later than 16.00 on the preceding day. In order that preference can be given to
visitors to the University, staff will be required to book a reserved space between the hours of
9.00 – 16.00 on the preceding working day only.
Owing to the limited spaces set aside for reserved parking the upper limit that can be reserved
for any single event/day is as follows:
Location
LocationBelfast
LocationColeraine
LocationJordanstown

Spaces
Spaces3
Spaces19
Spaces37

Location
LocationMagee

Spaces
Spaces14

See changes above to maximum number of spaces which can reserved for any single
event/day per campus.

Remote Validators
Senior Officers, Faculties and Departments who have frequent visitors and who wish to bear
the costs of their guests have the option of purchasing and using a remote validator.
Tickets should be validated for guests only and should never be validated for University staff
or students. Anyone persisting in this practice will be subject to the University's disciplinary
procedures.
Each car park remote validator owner must maintain a list of all transactions validated,
including the staff member requesting the validation and the name of the guest, including
their organisation details.
The host will instruct their guest to take a ticket at the entry barrier as any other
guest/occasional user, but rather than going to a Pay-on-Foot station before returning to their
vehicle, the host swipes their guests ticket through the remote validator and this enables the
visitor to present this ticket at the exit barrier and leave the campus free of charge (providing
it is within the 30 minute 'grace' period).
The system recognises the ticket has been validated by a particular validator, calculates the
amount due (based on entry and exit times held on the ticket) and this amount will be
deducted from the host's account/cost centre.
Remote validators are available by completing the Remote Ticket Validator Request Form ,
and returning to the Car Park and Traffic Management Office, at the initial cost of £350.00
each, with running costs then being deducted when used from the appropriate cost centre.
NOTE: Remote validators can only be issued following approval by the relevant Senior
Officer and the Assistant Chief Finance and Information Officer. Holders of ticket validators
must accept liability for all costs incurred by their remote validator.

Conferences and Events
For Conferences/events, prior arrangement should ideally be made with the Car Park and
Traffic Management Office unless the sponsors/organisers do not require any reserved
parking or do not wish to provide complimentary delegate parking. Car Park and Traffic
Management will supply options/details of parking arrangements, passes and charges relating
to conferences/events.
Three types of conferences/events are foreseen:

a) Conferences and events where the sponsors/organisers are happy for delegates/visitors to
pay the hourly/daily rates.


Drivers will take a ticket on entry, pay the tariff at a Pay-on-Foot station, and present
the ticket on exit.

b) Conferences/events where the short duration (i.e. part or single day event where the
attendee will remain on campus for the entire duration of the event) enables the sponsors to
credit delegates/visitors tickets at registration or prior to departure using a remote validator.


Drivers will take a ticket on entry, have their ticket validated by the sponsor on
registration/departure and present the sponsor's validated ticket on exit.

c) Conferences/events that are of long duration (i.e. more than one day or where the attendee
may/will exit and return to the campus during the duration of the conference/event).




The sponsor in this situation should request pre-programmed tickets from the Car
Park and Traffic Management Office for prior issue to delegates who will be
travelling by car. Drivers will insert their pre-issued ticket on arrival and retain their
ticket for the duration of the event. The cost of parking will be charged at a fixed rate
for the duration.
If multiple entry/exit tickets are required, please contact the Car Park and Traffic
Management Office.

Where pre-issue tickets are required the Advance Issue Complimentary Ticket Form should
be completed and sent to the Car Park and Traffic Management Office a minimum of 3
working days before the tickets are required for issue to delegates. The sponsor's cost code
will then be debited by the relevant amounts.

Hired Cars
When users of hired cars collect the vehicle keys from reception/security they will be given a
"one shot" ticket, which will allow free exit when presented at the exit barrier. Existing
Permit Holders may use their personal permit instead, if they are leaving their own vehicle on
campus.
On return to campus the driver of the hire car will take a daily ticket (unless they have
previously used their personal permit) to enable them to access the campus and this ticket
must be returned to reception/security when leaving back the vehicle keys.
Failure by users of hire cars to comply with these instructions will result in the charge for car
parking for the hire car for the full duration of the time between first arrival and departure
being charged to the users cost code.

Misuse of Permits
When a permit is issued, it is issued for the sole use of the person(s) who completed the form.
It must not be lent to other people or used to admit or grant exit to other vehicles because
they either do not have a permit or have forgotten their permit. Anyone persisting in this

practice will have their permit withdrawn pending investigation, and may be subject to legal
and/or disciplinary action as appropriate.
The following acts will be subject to legal and/or disciplinary action as appropriate:






Students discovered to be passing/selling their permits to staff.
Staff discovered to be passing / selling their permit to a third party.
Staff discovered to be using student permits.
Students discovered to be using staff permits.
Users discovered to be generally misusing permits or tickets.

Anyone discovered to be fraudulently applying or using any type of permit to evade or
unfairly reduce their tariff will have their permit revoked.
'Found' permits should be handed in to the Car Park and Traffic Management Office on the
campus. Anyone discovered to be using a lost permit will be subject to disciplinary action.
Permits are not transferable.
The University reserves the right to withdraw the use of parking facilities where there has
either been misuse of tickets, permits or parking facilities, including 'tail-gating' through
barriers.

Immediate Clamping for Illegal, Unauthorised, Careless
Parking, Tailgating
Wheel Clamping will be enforced and offenders will be clamped immediately if their vehicle
is parked outside designated marked parking spaces or if the vehicle has been involved in
tailgating and returns to campus. Tailgating is where a car closely follows the preceding
car through an exit or entrance barrier without presenting a valid pass or ticket.
Persistent offenders or anyone removing a wheel clamp without authorisation will have their
parking permit for the University withdrawn.
The University will not accept any liability for damage caused by wheel clamping or by the
unauthorised removal of a clamp.
Details of the vehicle will be recorded and an infringement notice issued. The vehicle will be
immobilised via the use of a wheel clamp.
Warning notices advising of wheel clamping and action required by the driver for release will
be prominently displayed in accordance with good practice.
Inside the attached infringement notice will be a ticket, which will enable the recipient to pay
the release charge at a Pay-on-Foot station and obtain their clamp release receipt. Pay-onFoot stations accept cash, coins, and credit/debit cards. To have a clamp released telephone
028 70124331 and follow the directions provided. To maintain equitable and efficient
operation and management of University car parks, a firm and consistent approach will be
adopted for ALL offenders.

The University reserves the right to monitor and/or stop any vehicles observed tailgating. All
such vehicles will be subject to exclusion until the £100 penalty is paid. Any excluded
vehicle returning onto university premises will also be subject to being clamped until a
release fee of £100 is paid. Note that the University also reserves the right to exclude
permanently from all university premises any vehicles involved in tailgating.
An appeal procedure is available; however, the payment must be made in advance. If the
appeal is successful, the clamping/tailgating penalty will be refunded. Appeals should be
addressed in writing to the relevant Campus Provost and made within 14 days of being issued
the infringement notice
Car Park and Traffic Management Office/Security Staff are also empowered to move or two
vehicles causing an obstruction or parked in contravention of the parking regulations.
Only Emergency Services (Ambulance, Doctor, Fire and Police), public transport vehicles
plus branded delivery vehicles which are loading or unloading will be exempt from clamping
if not parked in a designated space.

Parking and Clamping
All persons parking vehicles on campus do so at their own risk. The University will not
accept liability for loss, damage or theft of bicycles, motorcycles, vehicles, and any
attachments there to, contents, etc.; however, caused.

Security Staff
Car Park and Traffic Management Office/Security Staff have authority to direct traffic on the
campus, regulate entry to car parks, exercise control over parking, and ensure compliance
with the University's parking arrangements.
Car Park and Traffic Management Office/Security Staff are also empowered to affix penalty
notices and attach wheel clamps to vehicles parked in contravention of the parking
regulations.

General Points
Vehicle Permit Holders should notify the Car Park and Traffic Management Office of any
subsequent changes in vehicle details.
The pre-paid permit entitles only one vehicle at any one time to use the car park.
All barriers are monitored by CCTV and each barrier has an intercom for direct voice contact
to the Control Room, should assistance be required. All such conversations are recorded.
All Pay-on-Foot Stations are monitored by CCTV and each has an intercom for direct voice
contact to the Control Room, should assistance be required. All such conversations are
recorded.

Patrol Officers will constantly monitor designated parking areas and the rules governing
illegal/ unauthorised parking will be strictly enforced.
Any members of staff or students discovered to be abusing the system will have their permit
withdrawn and their card removed from the system. They may not be eligible for any further
permit. If you forget your proximity card there is no alternative other than to take an
hourly/daily ticket and pay the calculated tariff for that visit/day. There is no way to obtain
entry/exit other than using a permit/proximity card or hourly/daily tickets and credit cards.
If a scheme member takes a ticket on entry there is no alternative other than to pay the
calculated tariff for that visit/day. Staff have been instructed not to grant a free exit in these
circumstances.
All drivers must be in possession of a relevant, valid driving licence for the vehicle they are
driving.
All vehicles and drivers must be covered by relevant and adequate insurance cover at all
times.

Forms
1. Student car sharing
2. Staff car sharing
3. Student cancellation
4. Staff cancellation
5. Lost/Damaged permit
6. Lost daily ticket
7. Change of vehicle
8. Motorcycle registration
9. Other user cancellation
10. Advanced issue complimentary ticket
11. Remote validation request form

