ULSTER UNIVERSITY
CCTV POLICY

1.

Closed Circuit Television (CCTV)

These guidelines (the “Policy”) set out the terms governing the use and management
of the CCTV equipment and images in order to ensure the University’s compliance
with the Data Protection Act 1998 (the “DPA”), Human Rights Act 1998 and other
relevant legislation.
This Policy is in line with the Information Commissioner's CCTV Code of Practice, a
copy of which is available online at:
http://ico.org.uk/for_the_public/topic_specific_guides/cctv
1.1 Purpose
The University has installed the CCTV system for the following purposes (the
“Purposes”):
1.1.1 to deter crime;
1.1.2. to assist in the prevention and detection of crime;
1.1.3. to assist with the identification, apprehension and prosecution of
offenders;
1.1.4 to assist with the identification of actions that might result in disciplinary
proceedings being taken against staff or students and in giving evidence
to relevant members of staff where disciplinary action may be or is being
taken; and
1.1.5 to identify car parking and traffic management problems at the campuses.
1.2 Covert Recording
1.2.1. In certain limited and exceptional cases, the University may be required to
carry out covert recording (i.e. use the CCTV scheme to monitor
individuals without alerting them to the fact).
1.2.2 Covert recording may only be undertaken with the written authorisation of
the Director of Physical Resources, or in his absence his nominated
deputy.
1.2.3. Any such monitoring will only be carried out for a limited and reasonable
amount of time consistent with the objectives of the monitoring, and only
for a specific unauthorised activity.
1.2.4. The monitoring must be necessary in order to obtain evidence of that
specific unauthorised activity.

Reviewed Sept 2016

1.2.5. The use of signage must be likely to prejudice the purposes for the covert
recording (i.e. the success of obtaining evidence of an unauthorised
activity).
1.2.6. The covert recording should only take place over a specific time period
and should not continue after that time period has expired or the
investigation has ended. Any monitoring which is likely to be oppressive
must be limited unless there are overriding reasons for doing so.
1.2.7. Covert recording should not be used in areas where individuals expect
privacy (such as bathrooms) unless there is a real suspicion of serious
crime and an intention to involve the police.
1.2.8. Any information that is not relevant to the main purpose of the covert
recording should be disregarded and, where possible, deleted.
1.2.9. All such activities will be fully documented showing the reason/s leading
to the decision to use covert recording and who made the decision.
1.3 Cameras
1.3.1 The University will make every effort to position cameras in order that they
only cover University premises and will be in a position to record images
relevant to the Purposes.
1.3.2. If for any reason, any neighbouring domestic areas that border the
University's property are included in the camera view, the relevant people
will be consulted prior to any recording, or recording for those areas will
be disabled/masked.
1.3.3. The University will clearly and visibly display signs so that staff, students
and visitors are aware that they are entering an area covered by CCTV.
1.3.4. Signs will state:
1.3.4.1 the University is responsible for the CCTV scheme;
1.3.4.2 the Purposes; and
1.3.4.3. who to contact regarding the CCTV scheme.
1.4. Quality of Images
1.4.1. Images produced by the CCTV equipment must be as clear as possible in
order that they are effective for the Purposes.
1.4.2. The University will ensure that the cameras are checked, maintained and
cleaned on a regular basis to ensure the integrity of the images. The
University shall retain a record of all maintenance work carried out to the
CCTV system.

1.5 Processing of Images - Retention and Security
1.5.1 Integrity of Images
Recording media must register the correct time and date.
1.5.2. Analogue Recording Systems
CCTV images recorded on a hard drive will be kept for a period of 31
days.
1.5.3. Digital Recordings
1.5.3.1. Digitally recorded CCTV images held on the hard drive of a PC or
a server will be overwritten on a recycling basis once the drive is
full and in any event will not be held for more than 31 days.
1.5.3.2. Images stored on removable media such as CD will be erased or
destroyed once the Purpose is no longer relevant. All digital
recordings will be digitally water marked to maintain integrity.
1.5.4. University Records Policy
1.5.4.1. Images and recording logs will be held in accordance with the
University Records Policy and Retention and Disposal Schedule.
A copy of the Schedule is available online at:
http://isd.ulster.ac.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0015/1554/retentionand-disposal-schedule.pdf
1.5.4.2. Recorded media no longer in use will be confidentially destroyed.
1.5.5. Access to and Disclosures of Images to Third Parties
1.5.5.1 Images recorded on CCTV will be restricted and carefully
controlled in order to ensure that the rights of the individual are
maintained and also that they can be used as evidence if
required. Images can only be disclosed in accordance with the
Purposes for which the information was originally collected and in
accordance with the Notification with the Office of the Information
Commissioner (as required by the DPA). A copy of the
University’s Notification is available by on the website of the
Information Commissioner at:
http://ico.org.uk/ESDWebPages/DoSearch
1.5.5.2. Access to images will be restricted to those staff that need to have
access for the Purposes.
1.5.5.3. All access to CCTV images recorded on any media will be
registered.

1.5.5.4. Disclosures to third parties will only be made in accordance with
the Purposes and will be limited to;
(a)

police and other law enforcement agencies where the
images recorded could assist in a specific crime enquiry
and/or the prevention of terrorism and disorder*;

(b)

prosecution agencies;

(c)

relevant legal representatives;

(d)

people whose images have been recorded and are still
retained (unless disclosure to the individual would prejudice
criminal enquiries or criminal proceedings);

(e)

in exceptional cases, to others to assist in identification of
victim, witness or perpetrator in relation to a criminal
incident; and

(f)

members of staff involved with University disciplinary
processes.

For the avoidance of doubt, recorded CCTV images shall not be
made available to anyone other than those persons set out
above.
*The Data Protection Co-ordinator, or their designated agent, are
the only staff that can authorise disclosure of information to the
police or other law enforcement agencies.
1.6. Data Subjects Access Rights
1.6.1. The DPA gives individuals the right to access personal information about
themselves, which includes CCTV images.
1.6.2. All requests for access to CCTV images should be made in writing to the
University's Data Protection Co-ordinator, c/o Mr Eamon Mullan,
University Secretary, Ulster University, Cromore Road, Coleraine BT52
1SA or by email at e.mullan@ulster.ac.uk. All requests will be treated as
a Subject Access Request under the DPA. Any requests need to include
the date, time, and location where the CCTV image was recorded and
may require further information to identify the individual. A £10 fee will be
payable to the University. The University will respond promptly and at the
latest within 40 days of receiving the fee and sufficient information to
identify the CCTV images. A copy of the University’s Subject Access
Request form and further information on the process is available online at:
http://www.ulster.ac.uk/secretary/policyimplementation/dataprotection/sar
_form.pdf. Hard copies of the form and information on the process is also
available by contacting the individuals listed in Appendix 1 to this Policy.

1.6.3. Security staff will refer all such requests to the University’s Data
Protection Co-ordinator.
1.6.4. If the University cannot comply with a request under the DPA the reasons
must be documented as to why not. The data subject must be advised in
writing, giving the reason why the information cannot be released, where
possible.
1.6.5. The manager responsible for the CCTV system will determine whether
disclosure of the CCTV images would disclose third party information.
1.6.6. Where CCTV images reveal other individuals, the University must blur or
disfigure the faces of those other individuals so that they are not
recognisable.
1.6.7. In addition to the right of access, an individual also has the right to ask the
University to stop processing personal data where this is likely to cause
substantial and unwarranted damage to him or her. Any such requests
should be submitted in writing to the University’s Data Protection Coordinator. Upon receipt of such a request the University has 21 days in
which to respond with its decision. All decisions should be documented
and a record should be kept of all requests and the University’s response
to those requests.
1.6.8. A copy of the University’s CCTV guidelines will be provided to anyone
making a written request for it under the Freedom of Information Act 2000.
1.6.9. If there is any doubt about what information must be provided to
enquirers, please contact the University’s Data Protection Co-ordinator.
1.7 Responsibility for CCTV Systems
1.7.1. For systems operated by Facilities Services the overall responsibility lies
with the Head of Facilities Services.
1.7.2. Day to day responsibility of each Campus is as follows:
Jordanstown:
Belfast:
Coleraine:
Magee:

Facilities Services Manager
Assistant Facilities Services Manager
Head of Facilities Services
Assistant Facilities Services Manager

1.8 Complaints
1.8.1. Complaints and enquiries about the operation of CCTV should be
addressed to those having day-to-day responsibility, as listed above.
Contact details are available upon request to the University’s Director of
Physical Resources on telephone no. 028 7012 4133.

1.8.2. Enquiries relating to the DPA should be referred to the University’s Data
Protection Co-ordinator.
1.8.3. If the individual is not satisfied with the response that he/she receives they
should write in the first instance to the Head of Facilities Services who
may in turn refer the matter to the University’s Data Protection Coordinator.
1.9 Monitoring Compliance
The respective managers of relevant areas are to undertake occasional reviews
with the University’s Data Protection Co-ordinator to ensure updating of
knowledge and compliance with the Policy and relevant legislation.
1.10 Compliance with this Policy
1.10.1. All employees (including temporary and contract staff) who are
responsible for implementing, managing, operating or using the CCTV
system must do so:
1.10.1.1. only as authorised and in accordance with this Policy;
1.10.1.2. with respect to those individuals who are being monitored;
and
1.10.1.3. for the Purposes.
1.10.1.4. Any failure to comply with this Policy may be a disciplinary
offence which could result in dismissal. Negligent or
deliberate breaches could result in criminal liability for you
personally.

APPENDIX 1

CONTACT DETAILS

Data Protection Co-ordinator

Mr Eamon Mullan
Telephone No: (028) 7012 4533
E-mail:
e.mullan@ulster.ac.uk

Equality and Legal Manager

Ms Angela Getty
Telephone No: (028) 9036 8869
E-mail:
ak.getty@ulster.ac.uk

Policy Co-ordinator

Ms Elinor Byrden
Telephone No: (028) 7012 3354
E-mail:
e.byrden@ulster.ac.uk

