ULSTER UNIVERSITY
DEREGISTRATION POLICY FOR ACADEMIC YEAR 2024/25
POLICY STATEMENT:
The policy provides guidance on the procedures relating to a student’s break in study
either via a leave of absence or complete withdrawal and the responsibilities of the
student and the faculty in completing this process. The policy also gives guidance to
students in assisting them with making an informed decision, fully exploring all options
and clearly stating tuition fee and funding implications that may be applicable to the
student. The policy is aimed at students and academic staff and applies to
undergraduate and postgraduate students that are studying on either a full-time or
part-time programme.
WHAT IS DEREGISTRATION?
Deregistration is the term given to a break in study either via leave of absence or
complete withdrawal from a programme of study.
Tuition Fee Liability
Deregistering from a programme of study may have financial implications therefore all
students are advised to refer to the Tuition Fee Liability Policy for further information.
Online Forms
You can complete a Leave of Absence or Withdrawal request for approval by your
Course Director by using the online forms. Your request should be submitted as soon
as you disengage from your studies to ensure tuition fee liability does not accumulate.
University Accommodation
If you are staying in University accommodation, you must inform Residential Services
of your intention to deregister. For further information please refer to the ‘Rules of
Residence’.
If you have a contract with a private landlord you can speak with Student Wellbeing,
UUSU or Citizens Advice for further advice and support.
THE DEREGISTRATION PROCESS FOR STUDENTS
Seeking Advice
Deregistration from a programme of study is not a step that should be taken lightly.
You should initially discuss your intention to deregister with your Course Director. Your
Course Director will provide advice and guidance on a suitable way forward exploring
all possibilities best suited to your individual circumstances e.g. transferring to another
programme of study or deferring studies until the next academic year.
Student Wellbeing can also provide further advice and support.

Financial Implications:
Deregistering from a programme of study may have financial implications affecting:
• Tuition fees owed to the University – Please see Tuition Fee Liability
Policy
• Student Loan (e.g. arrears for repayment of maintenance loan);
• Ulster University Bursary
• NHS Bursary/Grant
• Other forms of Grant/Scholarship/Sponsorship
If you receive financial support as outlined above, you have a duty to inform your
funding body that you have deregistered from your programme of study. Failure to
notify your funding body may result in a demand for immediate repayment of all
or part of your bursary/grant/scholarship/sponsorship.
Full-Time NI/ROI/GB Undergraduate/PGCE/Postgraduate Taught/MPhil and MRes
students may be liable for repayment of their maintenance loan as a result of their date
of deregistration and this may affect future applications to the Student Loans
Company.
New Students
If you are a new student with an intake year 2024/25, you will not be liable for any
tuition fees for that academic year if you withdraw within 14 days of completing
registration or within 14 days from first day of term whichever is the latest date
to allow a 14 day cooling off period. After which you are liable for 25% of your tuition
fees with increasing liability as the academic year continues. Please refer to the
Tuition Fee Liability Policy.
Returning students
If you are a returning student, you will be liable for 25% of your fees from the first
date of term or the corresponding amount dependent on the date of your
deregistration, with increasing liability as the academic year continues. Please refer to
the Tuition Fee Liability Policy.
Student Visa:
Deregistration for International students with a student visa will be dealt with in
accordance with the obligations of the university’s student visa sponsor licence. For
further information on how Leave of Absence or Withdrawal will affect your student
visa, visit Student Visa Rights and Responsibility or contact the Compliance team
(compliance@ulster.ac.uk) for further advice.
THE DEREGISTRATION PROCESS FOR COURSE DIRECTORS
In circumstances where a student is not engaging with their studies and has not
followed the deregistration procedures to either take a leave of absence or to withdraw,
it is the responsibility of the Course Director to notify their campus Registry
Office/Student Services HQ providing the last date of engagement, defined as last
date of attendance in a teaching session or assessment, whichever is the latest date
to ensure update of the student record which means tuition fee liability will not
accumulate.

The University’s General Regulations allow faculties to deem a student to have
withdrawn where the student has been absent for a period of 4 consecutive weeks.
In these circumstances, the Course Director should contact their campus Registry
Office/ Student Services HQ for further advice.
Examination Boards:
In circumstances where Registry are only made aware of a deregistration following an
Examinations Board meeting, the deregistration will be recorded as the date of that
meeting and the student will be liable for tuition fees up to that point in the academic
year.
Extenuating Circumstances:
Requests for a retrospective leave of absence or withdrawal will generally not be
considered, however in cases where there are clear extenuating circumstances
evidenced with for example a letter from a medical professional, the Director of
Student Administration will review individual case details.

