ULSTER UNIVERSITY
DIGITAL & INFORMATION SERVICES DIRECTORATE
LIBRARY SERVICE.
Policy Cover Sheet
Document Title
Custodian
Approving Committees
Policy approved date
Policy effective from date
Policy review date

Collections and Information Access Policy
University Librarian
Digital Strategy Steering Committee
February 2019
October 2021

Version Date
1.0
27/7/18

Author
C. Cregan

1a

9/8/18

2.0

30/08/2018

L. Young & J.
Kennedy
C. Cregan

2.1

6/9/18

C. Cregan

2.2
3

18.9.2018
28.09.2018

J. Peden
C. Cregan

4

08/10/2018

C. Cregan

4.1

22/11/208

4.2

3/12/2018

L. Young & J.
Kennedy
C. Cregan

4.3

13/12/2018

C. Cregan

Description
Revision of 15-18 policy to reduce
in size and reflect changes in
Library information provision
Further reduction to avoid
repetition of key aims of policy
Minor formatting and grammar
corrections
Incorporating comments from
Subs group
Comment and review
Changes accepted and changes
made in response to comments
including removal of section on
Collection Management (these
guidelines will be contained in a
separate operational document
for Library)
Review comments from CLMs
implemented
Further revision of text to improve
clarity of key aims of policy
Reviewed by Faculty ADEs and
other appropriate persons within
each Faculty including ADRs and
Teaching and Learning
Committees
Amended following discussion at
LMT 5/12/18

Library Collections and Information Access Policy 2018 status FINAL

1

Collections and Information Access Policy
Introduction
This document sets out the general framework within which the Library operates to
select, manage and review content from the Library’s collection of information
resources.
The policy supports the Library’s Mission Statement to ‘develop, deliver and
sustain Library services and resources to support the University in achieving its
corporate aims’ and is aligned to the current Library Services Strategy, “Learning
for Success”, Ulster’s draft Learning and Teaching Strategy (2018-2023) and the
overarching Institutional Five and Fifty Strategy.
The Policy will also support the University to achieve its strategic objectives in the
context of delivery of the Greater Belfast Development project and its ambitions in
relation to a Digital Strategy.
This policy is supported by a number of internal operational documents that can be
supplied on request.

Context
This revision of the Policy will inform the Library’s approach to collection
management and development and continues to focus on the delivery of information
resources in digital format.
Overall responsibility for the implementation of the Policy lies with the University
Librarian and Deputy Chief Digital and Information Officer.
Key objectives of the Policy are:
• To pursue an “electronic first” approach to the provision of materials and
services in line with the institution’s digital strategy, where availability, cost and
access models allow
• To enable the re-purposing of library space to accommodate changing
pedagogies as “right-sizing” of the Library’s physical collections is achieved
through appropriate stock management and via the outworking of the e-first
approach to information provision
• To meet most information needs of staff and students, whilst recognising that
not every demand can be satisfied
• To provide equitable access to all users
• To be flexible and responsive to the changing needs of users.

Establishing Requirements
The Library will work in partnership with Faculties to keep under constant review the
materials and information services needed to support the current teaching, learning
and research priorities of the University.

Library Collections and Information Access Policy 2018 status FINAL

2

Consultations between Sub Librarians and Deans or their representatives will inform
the Library’s purchasing plans, assisting with prioritisation and decision-making
where necessary. Ultimately, the Library will seek to achieve an overall balance
between competing needs to make the most effective use of the budget available.
In that context, the prioritisation of provision of resources in electronic form will be
the default starting point for the Library’s budgetary decisions during the life of this
Policy.
The Library will work closely with the University’s academic community. However,
to ensure consistency, the final responsibility for determining priorities rests with the
Library.

Selection of Information Resources
Faculty Sub-Librarians will engage with teaching and research staff to identify
appropriate subject specific content, using the following general guidelines:
•
•
•
•

Material selected must support the current learning, teaching and research
priorities of the University
The number of copies or simultaneous accesses purchased will depend on
anticipated and actual use, cost and availability
Digital versions, where suitable and available, will be acquired in preference to
the excessive duplication of print copies
Academic quality of materials is important so all material acquired should be of
an appropriate standard to support learning, teaching and research.

The format of content identified will be electronic where available unless the print
format presents significant advantages (in terms of cost, usability or accessibility).
Print and other formats will continue to be purchased where it is appropriate to do
so. Whilst there are often higher up-front costs associated with purchasing content
in electronic format, it must be recognised that the acquisition and processing of
print materials requires a considerable staff resource in the life-cycle management
of the material and associated space it inhabits. This difference in costs impacts on
provision overall.
Library staff will ensure the relevance and currency of stock and reserve the right to
decline to purchase any item not consistent with the objectives of the Collections
and Information Access Policy
The Library will make use of reading lists as the main means of ensuring students
have access to required and recommended information resources. There is an
expectation that a reading list will be provided for every module in a timely fashion
to enable the Library to provide appropriate resources at point of need. The Library
will be responsible for reviewing and making widely available the content of
reading lists received, and for managing any attendant acquisitions processes,
including the selection of formats, to ensure both appropriate accessibility for
students and value for money for the University.

Library Collections and Information Access Policy 2018 status FINAL

3

It is acknowledged that there are differences in the type of format preferred and
associated costs between different subject areas. This may mean the selection and
management of material will vary depending on the nature of the subject.
Information Resources
• Books
Books will be acquired in electronic form and with multi-user licences as far as
possible. Meeting the simultaneous demands of users, specifically undergraduate
students, remains a challenge but eBooks will be the preferred model for meeting
this demand.
Where possible, the Library will provide electronic access (or as a secondary
measure, print access) to all book titles listed as Required reading in student reading
lists.
It may not be possible to provide access to all items requested due to material being
either unavailable in eBook format, out-of-print and unavailable or too expensive to
purchase for the expected usage. In these cases, the Library will seek to provide
alternative access to key readings, from the British Library’s Copyright Cleared
Document Delivery Service. Where it is not possible to do so, academic staff will be
informed so that a substitute title may be suggested.
Alternative purchase models such as demand driven or evidence-based selection
of eBooks and purchase of eBook collections will be used where appropriate.
Where print copies are purchased, they may be distributed and moved across loan
categories and campuses according to identified demand.
• Journals
The Library will apply an “electronic first” approach to providing users with current
and archive content.
Faculties will be asked periodically to review current subscriptions to ensure
continued relevance and value for money. Where additional spending on journal
subscriptions is required to support new programmes, it may be necessary to
prioritise their acquisition over the continuation of some existing titles. As many
tittles now form part of nationally negotiated deals this may reduce the flexibility to
cancel individual titles. Before subscriptions are cancelled, the views of all
stakeholders including relevant Faculty staff will be taken into account.
In order to ensure continuing access to electronic materials, the Library will
subscribe to appropriate digital archive and e-journal preservation services and will
take advantage of potential future collaborative arrangements, both at national and
institutional levels, e.g. collaborative storage initiatives and institutional repositories.
• Databases
The Library will make databases and information collections available in electronic
format wherever possible to maximise access for users. Databases will be
subscribed to after due consideration of factors such as scholarly evidence of need,
cost effectiveness and ease of access. The Library’s preferred option is to make

Library Collections and Information Access Policy 2018 status FINAL

4

material available in web-based and full-text format provided there are clear
pedagogical advantages such as ease of access to content
• Non-Book Media
The Library provides access to a range of audio-visual resources to support
academic requirements. This material exists for legitimate academic use only, within
the constraints of UK copyright law and the University’s ERA (Educational
Recording Agency) licence.
Audio-visual materials are also made available online where appropriate, e.g. a
music streaming service is available. Materials in obsolete or superseded formats
will not usually be retained in the Library’s general collections.
• Scanned documents and offprints
Under the terms of the University’s Copyright and Scanning Licence, documents
such as book chapters and journal articles will be made available through the
Library’s centralised scanning service where the material is currently held in paper
or digital form by the Library.
Criteria such as user demand, the level of current access and potential cost will be
taken into account when considering the requests for digitisation. In compliance with
Licence requirements, usage data will be monitored and reported to Faculty Sub
Librarians and this will inform the renewal process.
For distance learning courses only, where material is required beyond the limits of
the Copyright and Scanning Licence, the Library will make use of the Copyright
Licensing Agency’s (CLA) Second Extract Permissions Service, which permits the
scanning of additional extracts from books and journals.
• Theses and Dissertations
In accordance with University regulations an electronic version of every research
thesis will be deposited in the University’s PURE repository, with access also
provided via the Library catalogue. The Library also maintains a collection of
research theses from past years in print format
The library will maintain a limited collection of Masters’ degree dissertations with a
mark of 70% or above (Distinction level) as exemplars or if they represent a unique
or significant resource. Decisions on retention of these will be made in consultation
with Faculties.
• Examination Papers
Past papers are available through the online exam paper database, which is
accessible both on and off-campus to registered users from the Library web site.
The Library will make available all papers provided by the Examinations Office in a
timely fashion.

Library Collections and Information Access Policy 2018 status FINAL

5

Institutional Repository and Open Access
The Library will work in partnership with the Research & Impact Department to
support and promote the University’s “green” open access policy and the University
Institutional Repository.

Special Collections
Detailed information about the special collections curated by the Library and the
latest strategy which informs decision-making in regard to the curation,
preservation and promotion of these collections is available from the Special
Collections and Rare Books webpages library.ulster.ac.uk/specialcollections
There are several collections of unique and distinctive material which are held in
closed access areas, primarily in the Coleraine and Magee Libraries. These special
collections support research and teaching at the University and their care is a vital
curatorial role of the Library. By nature of the material, these collections are curated,
managed and used separately from the main collections, usually under archival
conditions due to their fragility, rarity, financial or other value.
Due to administration and accommodation costs, new special collections will only
be initiated after careful consideration.

Donations (including bequests)
The Library will consider offers of gifts and donations in accordance with the same
selection criteria applied to other purchased acquisitions. All donations (bequests),
including those from academic staff, will be strictly assessed on an individual basis
by the appropriate Sub Librarian in consultation with the Campus Library Manager.
Donations will only be accepted if:
• The material is relevant to the current teaching and research interests of the
University
• Sufficient space is available
• There is limited cost in adding the material to stock
• There is full agreement that items may be disposed of in any manner deemed
appropriate.
Library staff reserve the right to decline any donation which is not consistent with
the aims of the Library or the University. The Library will retain the right to dispose
of donated material should it no longer meet these aims. Archive materials
specifically relating to the University are managed by Archives staff within the
Library.

Library Provision in Partner Institutions
Faculty Sub Librarians will liaise with librarians in the University’s partner institutions
and with the appropriate Subject Partnership Manager to ensure that Ulster students
in partner institutions have access to necessary Library resources.

Library Collections and Information Access Policy 2018 status FINAL

6

Reviewing the Policy
Changes to the Collections and Information Access Policy will be made at any time
in the light of new developments, emerging disciplines and evolving trends. It will be
reviewed overall in consultation with academic staff every three years to ensure that
it continues to reflect the strategic priorities of the University.

Library Collections and Information Access Policy 2018 status FINAL

7

