Policy for Physical Access and
Egress for Disabled People
15 June 2011

Last Reviewed- May 2023

Introduction

The policy for Physical Access and Egress at Ulster University outlines the
University’s commitment to comply with legislative requirements and to aspire
to be an example of good practice in this area. The policy aligns with the
University’s Equality Scheme and its Disability Action Plan and takes active
and deliberate account of Ulster’s Corporate Plan, its Corporate Aims and
Objectives, its Core Values and its Estate Strategy.

Definitions
For the purposes of this policy:
The University estate comprises all University buildings, open spaces,
grounds, facilities (including accommodation, recreational and service
facilities), laboratories, car parking and arrangements for other modes of
transport. It does not include any estate owned by the University’s
collaborative partners (e.g. further education colleges or other universities
running Ulster University courses), for which their governing/corporate bodies
have primary responsibility.
Physical access and egress throughout and between the University
buildings is the means of entry, perambulation and exit which are identifiable,
proportional and sensitive to the requirements of all individuals and groups at
the University and its campuses. Egress includes emergency egress.
This policy seeks compliance with the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 which
places a positive duty on the University to make both anticipatory and
reactive reasonable adjustments to its estate in order to enable disabled
individuals open, convenient and safe access and egress.
Under the Disability Discrimination Act 1995, disability is defined as ‘a
physical or mental impairment which has a substantial and long-term adverse
effect on a person’s ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities’. Some
disabilities may be visible, but others may not be immediately obvious, such
as mental ill-health or epilepsy.

2

Legislation Standards
The policy seeks compliance with the following legislation and standards:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

The Disability Discrimination Act (1995) (as amended);
The Special Educational and Disability (NI) Order 2005 (SENDO);
The Disability Discrimination (NI) Order 2006 (The ‘disability duties’);
Section 75 of the Northern Ireland Act (1998);
Health and Safety at Work (NI) Order 1978 (as amended);
Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations (NI);
Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1992 (as
amended);
The Fire and Rescue Services (Northern Ireland) Order 2006;
The Fire Safety Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2010
Building Regulations: The Building Regulations (Northern Ireland)
2012 (as amended)
o Technical Booklet Part R: 2012 “Access to and use of Buildings”;
o Technical Booklet Part H: 2012 “Stairs ramps, guarding and
protection from impact;
o Technical Booklet Part E: 2012 “Fire Safety”;
o Technical Booklet Part V: 2012 “Glazing”.

The University will also be guided by the following:
•
•
•
•
•

•

British Standards
o BS 8300-2: 2018
o BS 9999: 2017
Departmental Guidance
o The Evacuation of Disabled People from Buildings;
Statutory planning considerations:
o PPS 3: Access, Movement and Parking;
o Supporting Design Concept Statements;
Code of practice for the assurance of academic quality and standards
in higher education – Section 3: Students with Disabilities;
University policies:
o Equal Opportunities Policy;
o Estates Strategy;
o Procurement Policy;
o Health and Safety Policy; and
The University’s Equality Scheme.

It is important that Ulster University complies with, and demonstrates evident
sensitivity to, these diverse statutory and regulatory requirements and policy
priorities in order to enhance its reputation as a leading centre of excellence in
teaching and research in Northern Ireland, the island of Ireland and beyond.

3

Policy Statement/Aims
The policy for Physical Access and Egress at Ulster University seeks to
ensure that the University estate is universally accessible as this will provide
equality of access and egress for all students, staff and visitors to the
University. The University will undertake to remove any physical barriers to
access and egress, or where this is not possible, to find a reasonable
alternative method of providing the service/facility in question so as to
facilitate this intended equality.
The policy for Physical Access and Egress takes into account the changing
nature and time frames associated with Ulster University’s strategic
development plan. Therefore, the policy aims to ensure:
•
•
•
•

that best practice is incorporated into the design of any new buildings;
the current provision for access and egress to existing buildings
(including any planned refurbishment) complies with the legislative
standards;
that requests for reasonable physical adjustments will be dealt with in a
way which complies with legislative standards, and
the requirements of the Fire Regulations regarding the evacuation of
disabled people are met.

Implementation
The primary responsibility for this policy rests with Ulster University. Within
available resources, the Department of Estates Services has specific
responsibility for the effective execution of this policy. However, it will liaise
with Health and Safety Services, the Policy Implementation Unit and Student
Support to ensure its effective implementation. In order to implement this
policy Estates Services will:
•
•

Ensure that available resources are allocated in such a way as to fulfil
the objectives of the policy.
Communicate with and direct its staff, contractors and agents in a
manner consistent with the aims and objectives of the policy.

The policy has been approved by the Senior Leadership Team.

4

Additional ‘In Year’ Physical Access and Egress Requirements
Each year some students and staff will have specific additional minor physical
access requirements which may not have been anticipated by the University.
These are known as ‘In Year’ requirements. ‘In Year’ requirements should be
reported to the following departments, so that potential reasonable
adjustments can be discussed in confidence.
Students: Student Wellbeing
Staff and visitors: Policy Implementation Unit
Staff from these departments will then liaise with Estates Services and
Health Safety & Wellbeing Services regarding reasonable adjustments. Any
reasonable adjustments will then be programmed and actioned.
Additional Emergency Egress Requirements - Personal Emergency
Evacuation Plans
Some staff and/or students require assistance to evacuate a building during
an emergency. In these cases, individual Personal Emergency Evacuation
Plans (PEEPs) are drawn up by the University’s Health & Safety Officer, in
conjunction with Equality, Diversity and Inclusion, the Policy Implementation
Unit and Estates Services Departments.
Students requiring a PEEP should contact Student Wellbeing, and
staff requiring a PEEP should contact the Policy Implementation Unit.
These departments will then liaise with Health and Safety Services.
This will complement the University’s general evacuation strategy and the
emergency fire action plan for its buildings.
Additional Useful Information
For further information about the policy and/or its implementation, please
contact:
Director of Estates
BC-01-418
Ulster University
York Street
Belfast
BT15 1AP

5

