Ulster University
Risk Management Policy and Procedures

1

Table of Contents
Introduction ......................................................................................................... 4
Purpose............................................................................................................... 4
Scope ................................................................................................................. 4
Approach to Risk Management ............................................................................. 4
4.1 Why do we need risk management? ..................................................................... 4
4.2 What are the benefits of Risk Management? ......................................................... 5
4.3 How do we ensure delivery of these benefits? ....................................................... 6
5.
Risk Appetite ....................................................................................................... 6
6.
Risk Profile .......................................................................................................... 6
7.
Roles and Responsibilities .................................................................................... 6
8.
Risk Management Procedures .............................................................................. 8
8.1
Risk Identification ........................................................................................... 8
8.2
Risk Assessment ............................................................................................ 9
8.3
Risk Mitigation ................................................................................................ 9
8.4
Risk Monitoring ............................................................................................. 10
8.5
Risk Reporting (and Escalation Process) ........................................................ 10
9.
Risk Culture and Competencies .......................................................................... 11
10. Training ............................................................................................................. 12
11. Appendices ....................................................................................................... 13
Appendix 1 Risk Appetite Definitions ........................................................................ 13
Appendix 2 Risk Categories/Subcategories and Appetite Statements ......................... 14
Appendix 3 Risk Register Template ......................................................................... 16
Appendix 4 University Risk Impact and Likelihood Matrix .......................................... 17
Appendix 5 Risk Reporting and Escalation ............................................................... 20
1.
2.
3.
4.

2

Document Owner

Director of Audit, Risk and Business Continuity

File Name

Risk Management Policy

Version

Reviewed/Approved

By Whom

Date

1.0

Reviewed

SLT

30.08.18

1.0

Approved

Audit Committee

10.09.18

2.0

Reviewed

Deloitte

06.02.23

2.1

Reviewed

Director, Audit, Risk and Business Continuity

13.02.23

2.1

Reviewed and
Approved

SLT

14.03.23

2.1

Reviewed

ARC

30.03.23

2.2

Reviewed and
Approved

Council

Expected to be
19.06.23

Date of next planned review

March 2025

3

1.

Introduction

Ulster University (“the University”) is exposed to a broad range of risks that could affect its academic,
administrative, or commercial activities. These risks form an inherent part of the execution of the
University’s processes, governance, and operations and as such, the University recognises that
management of these risks is essential if it is to achieve its operational aims and strategic objectives
as outlined in the People Place and Partnerships strategy.
In developing this Risk Management Policy, the University has been supported by its Internal Auditor
Deloitte through an assurance review conducted in February 2023. This took into account feedback
from University leaders on the application of the existing risk management framework as well as
guidelines set out in The HM Treasury Orange Book 2020 (Management of Risk – Principles and
Concept). Best practice across the sector has also been incorporated as well as guidance from ISO
31000:2018 Risk Management.

2.

Purpose

The overarching purpose of this policy is to provide a roadmap for the proactive management of risk
and its identification at the earliest opportunity in order to implement the most effective solutions to
manage it effectively.
The purpose of this policy is therefore to:
• provide a framework to support the University in formally identifying, assessing, managing,
mitigating, and reporting on its risks and associated controls on an ongoing basis;
• establish the roles and responsibilities of key committees, the Senior Leadership Team (SLT),
the Risk Management Committee and other relevant risk management bodies;
• outline the procedures for managing and participating in the formal risk management process;
• identify the main reporting and escalation pathways.
This document should be read in conjunction with the University’s Risk Appetite Framework and
Delegated Authority Framework.

3.

Scope

This Risk Management Policy forms part of the University’s internal control and corporate
governance arrangements and applies to all areas of the University and its activities including major
infrastructural and research projects. This policy also applies to the University’s related companies.
The University maintains the following categories of risk registers:
•
•
•
•

4.

Strategic,
Directorates (professional services),
Faculties, and
Programme and Project (these risk registers follow project management practices).

Approach to Risk Management

4.1 Why do we need risk management?
As recommended in ISO 31000:2018, managing risk should:
4

•
•
•
•
•

be iterative and assist organisations in setting strategy, achieving objectives, and making
informed decisions;
be part of governance and leadership, and fundamental to how the organisation is managed
at all levels;
contribute to the improvement of management systems;
be part of all activities associated with an organisation and include interaction with
stakeholders;
consider the external and internal context of the organisation, including human behaviour
and cultural factors.

Ulster University’s approach to Risk Management aims to adhere to the three broad themes of
Principles, Process and Framework as proposed by ISO and outlined below. A consistent and
balanced application of all three themes will be required so that managing risk is efficient, effective,
and consistent.

ISO 31000:2018 Risk Management Guidelines

4.2 What are the benefits of Risk Management?
Effective risk management:
•
•
•
•
•
•

allows us to identify, understand and manage risks at all levels across the University,
ensures opportunities are identified and capitalised on,
guarantees that informed decisions are made,
increases the probability of success,
reduces the probability of failure,
ensures regulatory requirements are met.

Collectively these actions increase the likelihood of the University achieving its strategic aims as
set out in People, Place and Partnership.

5

4.3 How do we ensure delivery of these benefits?
•
•
•
•
•
•

5.

Methodically assess the University’s risk profile including current risks relating to the
University’s activities and identify future/emerging risks against the University’s risk appetite.
Adhere to the requirements to fulfil the University’s Risk Management Procedures and review
the design adequacy of the process and supporting tools periodically.
Embed risk management as a continuous and developing process which runs throughout the
University’s strategy and its implementation.
Where necessary, assign responsibility for risk management as part of staff member’s job
description.
Establish independent testing through Internal Audit of the Risk Management Process, to
review for operating effectiveness across the University.
Promote and embed a strong risk culture for the entire University, with an effective policy and
programme led by SLT.

Risk Appetite

Risk Appetite provides a framework which enables an organisation to make informed management
decisions. The British Standard BS31100 defines risk appetite as “the amount and type of risk that
an organisation is prepared to seek, accept or tolerate”. The University has developed a Risk
Appetite Framework which outlines the types of risk and associated thresholds which the University
is willing to accept in pursuing its objectives and ensure their monitoring and oversight. The Risk
Appetite Statements (RAS) indicate the parameters within which the University would want to
conduct its activities by setting out broadly ‘acceptable’ levels of exposure for each of the University’s
material risk categories. Appendix 1 defines the risk appetites that the University uses.

6.

Risk Profile

The University is exposed to several risk categories. This is not an exhaustive list and may change
depending on the nature of the risk. The known risk categories include:
•
•
•
•

Strategic risk
Operational risk:
Financial risk
Compliance/Legal risk

A series of risk sub-categories have also been identified to align with these risks. Appendix 2
includes further details on these appetite categories and their statements.
Strategic
Capital Risk
Commercial Risk
Regional Balance

7.

Operational
Operations
IT & Cyber Risk
Business Continuity Risk
People Risk
Health & Safety
Project/Programme Risk

Financial
Financial Sustainability
Fraud

Compliance/Legal
Governance
Legal
Compliance

Roles and Responsibilities
6

All members of the university community have a responsibility to engage in effective risk
management and oversee the delivery of effective risk management practice within their areas.

Group/Function

Roles and Responsibilities

Council

•
•
•
•
•
•

Audit & Risk
Committee

•
•
•

To set the tone and influence the culture of risk management within the scope
of its remit.
Determine the level of risk that the University will carry in relation to specific
major activities or projects and across the institution.
Approve major decisions affecting the University’s risk profile or exposure as
set out in the delegated authority framework.
Satisfy themselves that less significant risks are being actively managed, with
appropriate controls in place and working effectively.
Annually review the University’s approach to risk management and approve
changes or improvements to key elements of its processes and procedures.
Publish statements of assurance that the University operates a robust system
of internal control and comment on the management and mitigation of any risks
that have arisen during the accounting period.
Considering its responsibility to oversee the internal and external audit work of
the University and provide assurance to Council on the effectiveness of the
University’s system for the management and control of risk.
Undertake an annual review of the effectiveness of the risk management
process and provide a report to Council.
Co-ordinate with Council in respect of its oversight of the University’s risk
management function including recommending to Council the approval of the:
▪ University’s Risk Management Policy and any amendments thereto.
▪ University’s Strategic Risk Register and any issues with the design
adequacy and operating effectiveness of control.
▪ University’s risk appetite statements and thresholds

SLT

Led by the Vice Chancellor, SLT members are responsible for effective risk
management in their areas of responsibility, in accordance with this risk
management policy and procedures. Key roles of SLT are to:
• Review annually the institutional risk appetite statements and appetites
assigned to the categories of risk for consideration and approval by Council.
• At least three times per year, identify and evaluate all significant strategic risks
faced by the University for consideration by Audit and Risk Committee and
Council.
• Provide accurate information on the status of risks and controls to allow timely
reporting to SLT, Audit and Risk Committee and Council.
• Undertake training and development activities associated with risk
management.
• Ensure the adoption of risk management amongst their staff.

Chief Strategy and
Finance Officer

The Chief Strategy and Finance Officer is responsible for ensuring that there is an
effective risk management framework in place.

Senior Managers
(e.g., Executive
Deans, Heads of
School, Directors)
Director of Audit,
Risk, and Business
Continuity

All senior managers are required to undertake regular reviews and assessment of
key risks within their areas of operation as part of routine management
arrangements.
•
•
•
•

Develop and ensure the provision of adequate risk management training to
risk owners to facilitate the effective operation of risk management across the
University.
Ensure adequate communication of risk management processes across the
University
Promote a strong risk management culture.
Attend Audit and Risk Committee meetings to report on risk, issues and events
as required.
7

Group/Function

Roles and Responsibilities
•
•

8.

Submit risk management reports on the University risk profile as required.
Provide secretariat support to the Risk Management Committee.

Risk Management Procedures

The University’s procedures for managing risk are based primarily on the Risk and Control SelfAssessment Process (RCSA). RCSA is a ‘Bottom Up’ process through which risks and associated
controls are identified, assessed, mitigated, monitored, and reported. It also supports tracking of
control design deficiencies and any associated remediation plans.
There are three overarching stages to the RCSA Process:

Prepare
and Input

Review and
Challenge

Track and
Report

containing five specific activities:
1
Identifica
tion

8.1

2
Assessm
ent

3
Mitig
ation

4
Monitori
ng

5
Reporting

Risk Identification

Risks are identified by considering what could impact on the achievement of the
University’s/functional area’s objectives. Directorates and Faculties within the University must
ensure that all relevant key risks are fully reflected on their risk registers. They should identify their
risks specific to activities performed in their business units. A sample risk register is attached in
Appendix 3.
Each risk must be articulated as follows in the description field in the risk register:
•
•
•

One Event (Risk of)
One Cause (Due to)
Impact (Resulting in)

The difference between an Event, a Cause and the Impact should be considered:
Risk Event – can be defined as the actual, single occurrence in a wider process
Cause – the specific Cause that gives rise to the Event
Impact – the specific effect the Event will have on the People, Process, Unit
For the construction of each risk, ensure that the full context of the risk is understood:
•
•
•
•

The activity being executed
The operational or regulatory compliance risk Event that may materialise
What specific Causes may result in the risk Event materialising
The Impact of the occurrence

e.g., Risk of data breach due to staff error resulting in regulatory censure.
8

8.2

Risk Assessment

All identified risks need to be assessed based on the likelihood that they will occur, and their impact
should they materialise.
Likelihood: The likelihood of occurrence is estimated on a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 is very remote, if
ever, and 5 is highly likely i.e., unavoidable/already happening.
Impact: The impact on Ulster University if the risk materialises is estimated using a scale of 1 to 5,
where 1 is equivalent to having an insignificant impact and 5 is equivalent to having a severe impact.
Risk assessment should be completed for inherent risk (i.e., the level of risk in the absence of any
controls) and residual risk (i.e., the level of risk taking into consideration the current controls in
place).
The University has developed and uses risk criteria based on a 5 x 5 scoring methodology as set
out in Appendix 4. Applying this methodology assists in the ranking of risks.
The heat map below demonstrates the resulting levels of risk after assessing the likelihood and
impact. The table below provides an explanation of these risk scores and any actions required.

Score

Explanation

1-4 Low
5-12
Medium
15-25 High

Low level risk which is under control but should be reviewed twice yearly.
Medium level risk which needs managed and reviewed quarterly
•
•
•
•
•

8.3

High level risk which should be monitored and reviewed monthly.
Within Faculties and Directorates, these high-level risks should be reviewed by the senior
management team within the respective area.
All High-level risks (i.e., with a net score of 15 or more), will be considered by the Risk
Management Committee on a quarterly basis. Any impact at a Strategic level will be
reported to SLT on a quarterly basis.
All strategic risks will be presented to each meeting of the Audit and Risk Committee.
Senior Risk owners will present on their specific risks and response plans to Audit and Risk
Committee on a rotational basis.

Risk Mitigation

The likelihood and/or impact of a risk can be reduced by following several treatment strategies which
include:
9

•
•
•
•

Improving the effectiveness of existing controls.
Implementing a new control(s) to mitigate the risk (either decrease the probability of the event
happening and/or decreasing the consequences if the event were to occur).
Transferring the risk such as outsourcing certain activities to a third party or obtaining
insurance against the impact of a risk; and/or
Terminating or avoiding the activity or process in which the risk has been identified.

Current controls recorded on the risk register should be operational controls that are executed in the
functional area. If relevant controls are executed in another area, the control details will be recorded,
and the information used to arrive at the residual score.
The control description should outline the following detail:
• Who is operating the control?
• What is the control doing?
• When is it being performed?
• Why is it being performed
• Where is the evidence of control execution maintained?
Every risk identified will have a completed Risk Response Plan (RRP). The RRP template will be
generated automatically using Power BI and will contain key information in relation to the risk. Each
functional area will be expected to outline further controls or actions, the owner of these controls and
a timeline for their implementation.

8.4

Risk Monitoring

The monitoring of risk is implicit in the daily business of all areas of the University. However, the
University and its functional areas should ensure that risks and controls are monitored formally by
reviewing and updating its risk registers as set out in section 7.5 below.

8.5

Risk Reporting (and Escalation Process)

It is expected that reporting on risk will include, but should not be limited to, the following:
• Changes to the risk profile, in particular those significant risks which are increasing or
decreasing
• New and outstanding actions plans to remediate or enhance controls that mitigate significant
risks
• New and emerging risks as identified within the reporting period; and
• Risk incidents or breaches identified within the reporting period.
The University’s Risk Appetite Framework is designed to allow for the identification and escalation
of those risks that have exceeded the tolerance level of acceptance.
To maximise the benefits of risk management, it is essential that risk owners engage fully with the
process so that the reporting, and consequently the effective management of risk is optimised. In
In addition to regular reviewing, risks should be identified and recorded on the relevant registers
below:
•

Strategic Risk Register: The Strategic Risk Register is formally reviewed at least three times
per year by the Risk Management Committee. It is then presented to the Senior Leadership
Team for approval. Audit and Risk Committee will also receive the SRR, with significant
changes reported through to Council as appropriate. The SRR is presented to Council
annually as part of the annual accountability/ financial statements sign off.
10

•

Faculty and Directorate Risk Registers: Executive Deans and Directors are required to
regularly review and update their risk registers at management meetings (a minimum of 3
times per year). High level risks will be reported to each meeting of the Risk Management
Committee.

•

Project Risk Registers: Project risk registers are the responsibility of each Project Board.
High level risks should be escalated to each Programme Board meeting and/or Project
Sponsor.

All residual high-level risks should be escalated to the Risk Management Committee. Where the
proximity of the risk event occurring is a factor and the Committee meeting not scheduled for some
time, the residual high-level risk should be escalated to the Strategic Leadership Team for
consideration.
The reporting requirements for effective risk management across the University are outlined below.
Group

Role

Receives reports from

Reports to

Executive Deans

Identify, manage, and report on
their Faculty’s risks

DVC

Directors

Identify, manage, and report on
risks within their own business
areas
Collate and oversee all faculty
risks
Identify, manage, and report on
risks within their portfolios
To review the high-level risks of
the University and ensure that
these are appropriately
documented and managed.

Heads of School, Research
Directors, School Boards,
and other Management
meetings.
Departments and business
units within their respective
areas.
Faculty Leadership Team
meetings
Directors/Managers

DVC
Senior Officers
Risk Management
Committee

Project/Programme
Sponsors

Identify, manage, and report on
project/programme risks for
which they are owner/sponsor

Key business areas of the
University including
faculties, professional
services, and Senior
Officers
Project Boards

Risk Management
Committee and/or
Portfolio Lead
Risk Management
Committee
Risk Management
Committee/SLT
SLT

SLT and/or
Relevant Boards or
Sub-Committee of
Council

Appendix 5 provides a visual guide to the reporting and escalation pathways.

9.

Risk Culture and Competencies

It is widely accepted that risk culture in any organisation is influenced by the “tone from the top''.
Within the University, a strong risk culture encompasses a general awareness, attitude, and
behaviour of staff to the taking of appropriate risk, and vitally, the management of these risks.
The designated Risk Management Committee, senior managers and all staff are required to have
an appropriate level of understanding of the risk management framework.
A strong risk culture is about having embedded, functional risk management procedures that foster
prudent risk management, encourage informed risk‐taking, and ensure that emerging risks or risk‐
taking activities outside the University’s Risk Appetite Framework are documented, analysed,
escalated, and mitigated within an appropriate timeframe.
Fostering and embedding an appropriate risk culture must emanate from:
11

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

A top-down approach (tone from the top) that models Senior Management behaviour and
core values
An explicit and well‐known Risk Appetite Statement
Transparent and consistent decision-making processes
Clear roles and accountability for controls and attestation
Clear escalation points that allow for prompt reporting of issues
The identification of weaknesses around controls and appropriate remedial actions
Creating learning opportunities out of failures and striving to constantly improve and

10. Training
Targeted technical training should be provided on the risk management process e.g., training on
conducting risk identification, assessment and the codification of risk and control on the risk register.
Senior Managers are responsible for ensuring that the right staff members are identified to attend
the training sessions.

12

11. Appendices
Appendix 1 Risk Appetite Definitions

Lower
Higher
Averse
Avoidance of
risk and
uncertainty is a
key University
Objective

Low Risk
Appetite

Appetite for Risk
Higher
Minimising

Cautious

Risk Taking

Risk Seeking

Preference for
ultra-safe
business
delivery options
that have a low
degree of
inherent risk
and only have
a potential for
limited reward

Preference for
safe delivery
options that have
a low degree of
inherent risk and
only have a
potential for
limited reward

Willing to consider
all potential for
delivery options &
chose the one that
is most likely to
result in successful
delivery while also
providing an
acceptable level of
reward and value
for money

Eager to be
innovative and
chose options
offering
potentially high
rewards despite
greater risks

Low to
Medium Risk
Appetite

Medium Risk
Appetite

Medium to High
Risk Appetite

High Risk
Appetite

13

Appendix 2 Risk Categories/Subcategories and Appetite Statements
Risk Category

Risk Subcategory

Capital risk

Commercial risk
Strategy

Regional Balance

Operations

IT & Cyber Risk

Operational

Business
Continuity Risk

People Risk

Risk Appetite Statement
The University has adopted a cautious approach towards poorly
designed capital development programmes relating to the design of
strategic development of property and the University’s estate.
Cautious
The University has adopted a risk-taking approach relating to an
entrepreneurial approach around income diversification and embarking
on new opportunities.
Risk Taking
Ulster University is committed to a multi-campus university model that
creates shared spaces where people can co-locate and build
communities of research-led learning across each of the campuses. The
University has adopted a risk-taking approach to regional balance that
recognises the University’s unique position to stimulate and drive
forward balanced regional development.
Risk Taking
A degree of risk is implicitly built into continued growth, new approaches
and intended change. The University wishes to continue to develop
teaching and research excellence and student experience. Risk to the
University’s operations will be mitigated through drawing from
experienced staff and learning from proven effective practice from other
universities within the sector.
Risk Taking
The University is risk averse to disruption in relation to IT & Cyber Risk
and has no tolerance for Cyber Risk breaches. The University
continuously monitors developments and potential threats and has
established a robust control environment including vulnerability
assessments and penetration testing to protect the organisation from
cyber-attacks.
Risk Averse
The University is risk averse to material business disruption of its
operations and/or services to key stakeholders which could result in
failure for the University to deliver its strategic objectives and/or lead to
reputational damage.
Risk Averse
The University aims to value, support, develop and utilise the full
potential of our staff to make the University a stimulating and safe place
to work. It places importance on a culture of academic freedom, equality
and diversity, dignity and respect, collegiality, annual reviews, the
development of staff, work-life balance, and the health and safety of
staff, students, and visitors. The University is also committed to
enhancing the learning and social experiences of students. The
University wishes to minimise any deviations from its standards in these
areas.
Cautious

Health & Safety

The University has zero tolerance towards the well-being and health and
safety of its students, staff, visitors, and contractors. It will have
mitigation in place to ensure that adequate controls are in place to
prevent and detect any health hazards in the Institution.
Risk Averse
14

Risk Category

Risk Subcategory

Project/Programm
e Risk

Financial
Sustainability
Financial

Risk Appetite Statement
The University understands there is a risk that programmes and projects
are not aligned with strategic priorities and do not successfully and
safely deliver requirements and intended benefits to time, cost and
quality. The University is a risk taker when it comes to project and
change risks as it has a broad range of projects / change programmes
underway to support its strategic growth objectives. The University is
committed to ensuring that projects and any associated change is
robustly managed to minimise the risk of negative impact on existing
business, process, technology, or University structures.
Risk Taking
The University has a Cautious approach to Financial Sustainability Risk
and operates a sustainable finance strategy due to our innovative culture
and willingness to consider and pursue new opportunities to support the
delivery of our three overarching aims within the People, Place and
Partnership Strategy. The University's cautious risk appetite in financial
risk is reflective of the fact that in the pursuit of increase in financial
reward, it is at times appropriate to accept (in this case medium) level of
financial or commercial risk while at the same time proceeding with
caution.
Cautious
The University is risk averse to any exposure to fraudulent activities.

Fraud

Governance

Compliance/
Legal

Legal

Compliance

Risk Averse
The University has a cautious approach to risks arising from unclear
plans, priorities, authorities, and accountabilities, and/or ineffective or
disproportionate oversight of decision-making and/or performance either
within the University itself or in relation to any partnerships (educational,
commercial or research) that it may enter into.
Cautious
The University is averse to risks arising from a defective transaction, a
claim being made (including a defence to a claim or a counterclaim) or
some other legal event occurring that results in a liability or other loss, or
a failure to take appropriate measures to meet legal or regulatory
requirements or to protect assets (for example, intellectual property).
Risk Averse
The University aims to be compliant with all laws and regulations
governing its operations and activities. The University is averse to any
risk related to Compliance Risks (including GDPR and Health and
Safety), which could result in exposure to systemic or material regulatory
breaches.
Risk Averse

15

Appendix 3 Risk Register Template

16

Appendix 4 University Risk Impact and Likelihood Matrix
RISK IMPACT CATEGORIES

Category →
Student Experience

Strategy and Policy

Minor impact affecting
single programme, but
which is unlikely to
have a material impact
on NSS scores or
retention

Impacts on minor part of
one strategic priority but
not significant enough to
require modifying the
strategy

Financial

Impact 
Insignificant (1)

Minor (2)

Moderate (3)

Minor impact affecting
several
programmes/large
group of students but
which is unlikely to
have a material impact
on NSS scores or
retention

Impacts on some aspects
of one or more strategic
priorities but not
significant enough to
require modifying the
strategy

Moderate impact
affecting local
programme area which
will have a material
impact on the
programme level NSS
scores and/or retention

Restricts ability to achieve
one or more strategic
priorities requiring some
modification to parts of
strategy.

Impact on budget or
additional
expenditure/(income):
Capital <£100k
Revenue < £25k recurrent

Impact on budget or
additional
expenditure/(income):
Capital £100k-£500k
Revenue £25k-£100k

Impact on budget or
additional
expenditure/(income):
Capital £0.5M-£1M
Revenue £100k-£500k
recurrent

Operational Performance/Business
Continuity

Reputation/Publicity

Disruption to potential
customer/contract/bid.

Negligible criticism / (praise) in specialist local
press.

Manageable disruption to minor services
resulting in no obvious loss of
performance.

Negligible impact on student recruitment,
relationship with funding bodies or partners.

Interruption of critical services >1 hour.
Unhappy customer/partner. Loss of
potential new customer/contract/bid.
Manageable disruption to some services
resulting in no loss of performance but
requiring additional staff and interim
working arrangements.
Interruption of critical services >3 hours.
Loss of minor
customer/contract/partnership/ bid.
Moderate disruption to some services
resulting in temporary loss of performance
affecting some programmes.

Fully recoverable within 1 day.

Some superficial
injuries.

Programme / discipline area criticised /
(praised) in local press.

Moderate impact
leading to warning.

Short term disruption to student recruitment,
relationship with funding bodies or partners.

Some minor reversible
injuries.

Recoverable within 1 week.

University criticised / (praised) in local press.
Medium term impact on student recruitment,
relationship with funding bodies or partners.
Recoverable within 1 month.

Interruption of critical services >6 hours.
Major (4)

High impact affecting
large number of
students which will
have a significant effect
on overall School level
NSS scores and/or
retention

Prevents successful
achievement of one
strategic priority resulting
in parts of strategy
needing to be revised.

Impact on budget or
additional
expenditure/(income):
Capital £1M-£5M
Revenue £0.5M-£1M
recurrent

Loss of mid-sized customer /
contract/partnership/bid.

University criticised / (praised) in national
press.

Inability to deliver core service resulting in
noticeable loss of performance affecting
ability to deliver programmes

Long term impact on student recruitment,
relationship with funding bodies or partners.
Recoverable within 6 months.

Interruption of critical services >12 hours.

Severe (5)

Severe impact affecting
large numbers of
students which will
have a significant effect
on University level NSS
scores and/or retention

Prevents successful
achievement of several
strategic priorities
resulting in strategy
needing to be revised.

Impact on budget or
additional
expenditure/(income):
Capital >£5M
Revenue>£1M recurrent

Loss of major customer /
contract/partnership/bid.

Legal/Regulatory
Compliance /
Governance / Health
& Safety
Minor impact. No
reprimand, sanction,
or legal action.

Severe criticism / (praise) in national press.

Inability to deliver core service resulting in
stopping delivery of programmes.

Permanent impact on student recruitment;
irreparable damage to relationships with
funding bodies and significant partners.

Interruption of critical services >24 hours.

>12 months to restore level of credibility.

Significant legislative
breach resulting in
investigation.
Major reversible injury
to staff, student, or
member of public. Not
life threatening.
Serious legislative
breach resulting in
intervention,
sanctions, and legal
action.
Major irreversible
injury or death of staff,
student, or member of
public.
Major legislative
breach resulting in
suspension of
business.
Multiple major
irreversible injuries or

17

deaths of staff,
students, or members
of the public.

18

QUANTATATIVE MEASURES OF LIKELIHOOD
Score

Descriptor

Very remote (1)

<5%

1 in 20 chance or less frequent

Remote (2)

6% - 25%

1 in 20 chance to a 1 in 4 chance

Possible (3)

26% - 50%

1 in 4 chance to a 1 in 2 chance

Probable (4)

51% -75%

Highly likely (5)

> 71%

Description

1 in 2 chance to a 3 out of 4
chance
3 out of 4 chance or more
frequently

19

Appendix 5 Risk Reporting and Escalation

Council

ARC

SLT

RMC

DVC

Faculties

School Boards
Research
Institutes

Portfolio

Professional
Services

Business Units
Departments

Project
Owners

Project Boards

20

