UUSU Good Relations Policy
Good relations within the context of UUSU, means promoting better relationships between people
from different political, religious and racial backgrounds, tackling racism and promoting cultural
diversity and inclusion.
As a forward-looking organisation, created to support and represent our members, we shall strive to
ensure that preference is not given to, or advantage withheld, from any member of the Union. UUSU
strives to create good relations on campus and to tackle inequality and promote the benefits of
diversity within UUSU, Ulster University and wider society.
This Policy applies to all Students’ Union members, activities, societies and services. It focuses
particularly on the good relations characteristics of race, religion and political opinion. It encompasses
areas including political expression, culture, language and dress code. The policy is supported by the
Political Expression Framework and the UU Dress Code Policy.
Definitions
By good relations we mean ‘the growth of relationships and structures for Northern Ireland that
acknowledge the religious, political and racial context of this society, and that seek to promote
respect, equity and trust, and embrace diversity in all its forms’ Equality Commission Northern
Ireland.
An effective Good Relations policy is one whereby every person knows, accepts and embodies good
relations as a core value in all of their interactions at the University. It aims to maximize the
potential of students and encourages them to function in a comfortable environment. Good
Relations policies are designed to foster and encourage healthy debate and exchange while
excluding violence or threat of any kind. The aim of our policy is to ensure that student culture in
Ulster University is vibrant, open and tolerant based on our principles of acknowledging and
welcoming diversity, promoting equality of opportunity and access and ensuring that students of all
backgrounds are welcome and free from intimidation or threat. The policy will normally be selfregulating every e.g The student union officers will evaluate the policy and make amendments or
updates which they deem fit for the policy, these amendments and updates will then be passed by
council.
The Equality Duty - Section 75 (1) requires the University, in carrying out its functions relating to
Northern Ireland, to have due regard to the need to promote equality of opportunity between:
• persons of different religious belief, political opinion, racial group, age, marital status or sexual
orientation; • men and women generally; • persons with a disability and persons without; and •
persons with dependents and persons without.
Diversity describes the range of visible and non-visible differences that exist between people.
Managing diversity harnesses these differences to create a productive environment in which
everybody feels valued, where talents are fully utilised and in which organisational goals are met
(Kandola and Fullerton 1998).
Inclusion in equal opportunities terms is about making every member of a community feel that they
are not prevented from taking part in any activity, applying for any job, applying to become a student
in any Higher Education Institution, because of any personal characteristic relating to their race or

ethnicity, gender, disability status, sexual orientation, religion or belief, age or socio-economic group.
Policies and practices that are open, fair, transparent and equitable encourage inclusion.
Aims of UUSU in terms of Good Relations:
•

•
•
•
•

To ensure that students of different racial groups, culture, gender, political and religious belief
are welcomed and supported in an environment in which they are free to participate fully,
safely and without fear, whilst respecting the diversity of opinion and the rights of others;
To make a positive contribution for an inclusive, tolerant and open environment for all
studying at Ulster University;
To create opportunities for political leadership for those who are underrepresented within
Ulster University, and wider society;
To foster and encourage healthy debate and exchange while excluding violence or threat of
any kind;
To ensure that student culture in Ulster University is vibrant, open and tolerant based on our
principles of acknowledging and welcoming diversity, promoting equality of opportunity and
access and ensuring that students of all backgrounds are welcome and free from intimidation
or threat.

Implementation of these Aims:
•
•
•

Adoption of the Good Relations policy, and promotion of such to all students;
Ensuring all events and services are delivered in the spirit of this policy;
Proactively promoting diversity and inclusion through further policies and practice, for
example UUSU Diversity Networks and seats for underrepresented groups on Student Council.

Responsibility for Implementation:
The President of UUSU will be responsible for reviewing this policy, with all student officers being
responsible for displaying the values and promoting inclusion.
All members of UUSU are responsible for upholding these values and ensuring their behaviours do not
discriminate against others.
Relevant Policies and Legislation
This policy co-exists with University and UUSU policies, as well as legislation:
Legislation:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Section 75 of the Northern Ireland Act (1998);
The Race Relations (NI) Order (1997);
Sex Discrimination (NI) Order( 1976);
The Fair Employment & Treatment (NI) Order 1998;
Disability Discrimination Act 1995;
Employment Equality (Sexual Orientation) Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2003;
Employment Equality (Age) Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2006;
Equal Pay Act (Northern Ireland) 1970;
Human Rights legislation as it applies in Northern Ireland; (and all their amendments)

Ulster University & UUSU Policies:
•

Ulster University’s Equality Scheme which can be accessed via the below link:
www.ulster.ac.uk/aboutus/governance/equality-diversity/equality-scheme
This includes a high-level action plan which maps out how the University and the Students’
Union will fulfil this policy commitment within the context of Northern Ireland.

•
•
•
•
•

UUSU Equal Opportunities Policy: [Link to this]
UU Bullying & Harassment (Dignity at Work) Policy and Procedures;
The Student Charter;
The Students’ Union Articles Of Association
The Student Handbook

Complaints
Where the complaint involves the President, please contact the Chief Executive Officer of UUSU –
d.longstaff@ulster.ac.uk

